The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Picture of Dorian Gray, by Oscar Wilde

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Picture of Dorian Gray

Author: Oscar Wilde

Release Date: June 9, 2008 [EBook #174]
[This file last updated on July 2, 2011]
[This file last updated on July 23, 2014]


Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PICTURE OF DORIAN GRAY ***




Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.










The Picture of Dorian Gray

by

Oscar Wilde




THE PREFACE

The artist is the creator of beautiful things.  To reveal art and
conceal the artist is art's aim.  The critic is he who can translate
into another manner or a new material his impression of beautiful
things.

The highest as the lowest form of criticism is a mode of autobiography.
Those who find ugly meanings in beautiful things are corrupt without
being charming.  This is a fault.

Those who find beautiful meanings in beautiful things are the
cultivated.  For these there is hope.  They are the elect to whom
beautiful things mean only beauty.

There is no such thing as a moral or an immoral book.  Books are well
written, or badly written.  That is all.

The nineteenth century dislike of realism is the rage of Caliban seeing
his own face in a glass.

The nineteenth century dislike of romanticism is the rage of Caliban
not seeing his own face in a glass.  The moral life of man forms part
of the subject-matter of the artist, but the morality of art consists
in the perfect use of an imperfect medium.  No artist desires to prove
anything.  Even things that are true can be proved.  No artist has
ethical sympathies.  An ethical sympathy in an artist is an
unpardonable mannerism of style.  No artist is ever morbid.  The artist
can express everything.  Thought and language are to the artist
instruments of an art.  Vice and virtue are to the artist materials for
an art.  From the point of view of form, the type of all the arts is
the art of the musician.  From the point of view of feeling, the
actor's craft is the type.  All art is at once surface and symbol.
Those who go beneath the surface do so at their peril.  Those who read
the symbol do so at their peril.  It is the spectator, and not life,
that art really mirrors.  Diversity of opinion about a work of art
shows that the work is new, complex, and vital.  When critics disagree,
the artist is in accord with himself.  We can forgive a man for making
a useful thing as long as he does not admire it.  The only excuse for
making a useless thing is that one admires it intensely.

               All art is quite useless.

                            OSCAR WILDE




CHAPTER 1

The studio was filled with the rich odour of roses, and when the light
summer wind stirred amidst the trees of the garden, there came through
the open door the heavy scent of the lilac, or the more delicate
perfume of the pink-flowering thorn.

From the corner of the divan of Persian saddle-bags on which he was
lying, smoking, as was his custom, innumerable cigarettes, Lord Henry
Wotton could just catch the gleam of the honey-sweet and honey-coloured
blossoms of a laburnum, whose tremulous branches seemed hardly able to
bear the burden of a beauty so flamelike as theirs; and now and then
the fantastic shadows of birds in flight flitted across the long
tussore-silk curtains that were stretched in front of the huge window,
producing a kind of momentary Japanese effect, and making him think of
those pallid, jade-faced painters of Tokyo who, through the medium of
an art that is necessarily immobile, seek to convey the sense of
swiftness and motion.  The sullen murmur of the bees shouldering their
way through the long unmown grass, or circling with monotonous
insistence round the dusty gilt horns of the straggling woodbine,
seemed to make the stillness more oppressive.  The dim roar of London
was like the bourdon note of a distant organ.

In the centre of the room, clamped to an upright easel, stood the
full-length portrait of a young man of extraordinary personal beauty,
and in front of it, some little distance away, was sitting the artist
himself, Basil Hallward, whose sudden disappearance some years ago
caused, at the time, such public excitement and gave rise to so many
strange conjectures.

As the painter looked at the gracious and comely form he had so
skilfully mirrored in his art, a smile of pleasure passed across his
face, and seemed about to linger there.  But he suddenly started up,
and closing his eyes, placed his fingers upon the lids, as though he
sought to imprison within his brain some curious dream from which he
feared he might awake.

"It is your best work, Basil, the best thing you have ever done," said
Lord Henry languidly.  "You must certainly send it next year to the
Grosvenor.  The Academy is too large and too vulgar.  Whenever I have
gone there, there have been either so many people that I have not been
able to see the pictures, which was dreadful, or so many pictures that
I have not been able to see the people, which was worse.  The Grosvenor
is really the only place."

"I don't think I shall send it anywhere," he answered, tossing his head
back in that odd way that used to make his friends laugh at him at
Oxford.  "No, I won't send it anywhere."

Lord Henry elevated his eyebrows and looked at him in amazement through
the thin blue wreaths of smoke that curled up in such fanciful whorls
from his heavy, opium-tainted cigarette.  "Not send it anywhere?  My
dear fellow, why?  Have you any reason?  What odd chaps you painters
are!  You do anything in the world to gain a reputation.  As soon as
you have one, you seem to want to throw it away.  It is silly of you,
for there is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about,
and that is not being talked about.  A portrait like this would set you
far above all the young men in England, and make the old men quite
jealous, if old men are ever capable of any emotion."

"I know you will laugh at me," he replied, "but I really can't exhibit
it.  I have put too much of myself into it."

Lord Henry stretched himself out on the divan and laughed.

"Yes, I knew you would; but it is quite true, all the same."

"Too much of yourself in it! Upon my word, Basil, I didn't know you
were so vain; and I really can't see any resemblance between you, with
your rugged strong face and your coal-black hair, and this young
Adonis, who looks as if he was made out of ivory and rose-leaves. Why,
my dear Basil, he is a Narcissus, and you--well, of course you have an
intellectual expression and all that.  But beauty, real beauty, ends
where an intellectual expression begins.  Intellect is in itself a mode
of exaggeration, and destroys the harmony of any face.  The moment one
sits down to think, one becomes all nose, or all forehead, or something
horrid.  Look at the successful men in any of the learned professions.
How perfectly hideous they are!  Except, of course, in the Church.  But
then in the Church they don't think.  A bishop keeps on saying at the
age of eighty what he was told to say when he was a boy of eighteen,
and as a natural consequence he always looks absolutely delightful.
Your mysterious young friend, whose name you have never told me, but
whose picture really fascinates me, never thinks.  I feel quite sure of
that.  He is some brainless beautiful creature who should be always
here in winter when we have no flowers to look at, and always here in
summer when we want something to chill our intelligence.  Don't flatter
yourself, Basil:  you are not in the least like him."

"You don't understand me, Harry," answered the artist.  "Of course I am
not like him.  I know that perfectly well.  Indeed, I should be sorry
to look like him.  You shrug your shoulders?  I am telling you the
truth.  There is a fatality about all physical and intellectual
distinction, the sort of fatality that seems to dog through history the
faltering steps of kings.  It is better not to be different from one's
fellows.  The ugly and the stupid have the best of it in this world.
They can sit at their ease and gape at the play.  If they know nothing
of victory, they are at least spared the knowledge of defeat.  They
live as we all should live--undisturbed, indifferent, and without
disquiet.  They neither bring ruin upon others, nor ever receive it
from alien hands.  Your rank and wealth, Harry; my brains, such as they
are--my art, whatever it may be worth; Dorian Gray's good looks--we
shall all suffer for what the gods have given us, suffer terribly."

"Dorian Gray?  Is that his name?" asked Lord Henry, walking across the
studio towards Basil Hallward.

"Yes, that is his name.  I didn't intend to tell it to you."

"But why not?"

"Oh, I can't explain.  When I like people immensely, I never tell their
names to any one.  It is like surrendering a part of them.  I have
grown to love secrecy.  It seems to be the one thing that can make
modern life mysterious or marvellous to us.  The commonest thing is
delightful if one only hides it.  When I leave town now I never tell my
people where I am going.  If I did, I would lose all my pleasure.  It
is a silly habit, I dare say, but somehow it seems to bring a great
deal of romance into one's life.  I suppose you think me awfully
foolish about it?"

"Not at all," answered Lord Henry, "not at all, my dear Basil.  You
seem to forget that I am married, and the one charm of marriage is that
it makes a life of deception absolutely necessary for both parties.  I
never know where my wife is, and my wife never knows what I am doing.
When we meet--we do meet occasionally, when we dine out together, or go
down to the Duke's--we tell each other the most absurd stories with the
most serious faces.  My wife is very good at it--much better, in fact,
than I am.  She never gets confused over her dates, and I always do.
But when she does find me out, she makes no row at all.  I sometimes
wish she would; but she merely laughs at me."

"I hate the way you talk about your married life, Harry," said Basil
Hallward, strolling towards the door that led into the garden.  "I
believe that you are really a very good husband, but that you are
thoroughly ashamed of your own virtues.  You are an extraordinary
fellow.  You never say a moral thing, and you never do a wrong thing.
Your cynicism is simply a pose."

"Being natural is simply a pose, and the most irritating pose I know,"
cried Lord Henry, laughing; and the two young men went out into the
garden together and ensconced themselves on a long bamboo seat that
stood in the shade of a tall laurel bush.  The sunlight slipped over
the polished leaves.  In the grass, white daisies were tremulous.

After a pause, Lord Henry pulled out his watch.  "I am afraid I must be
going, Basil," he murmured, "and before I go, I insist on your
answering a question I put to you some time ago."

"What is that?" said the painter, keeping his eyes fixed on the ground.

"You know quite well."

"I do not, Harry."

"Well, I will tell you what it is.  I want you to explain to me why you
won't exhibit Dorian Gray's picture.  I want the real reason."

"I told you the real reason."

"No, you did not.  You said it was because there was too much of
yourself in it.  Now, that is childish."

"Harry," said Basil Hallward, looking him straight in the face, "every
portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, not
of the sitter.  The sitter is merely the accident, the occasion.  It is
not he who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who, on
the coloured canvas, reveals himself.  The reason I will not exhibit
this picture is that I am afraid that I have shown in it the secret of
my own soul."

Lord Henry laughed.  "And what is that?" he asked.

"I will tell you," said Hallward; but an expression of perplexity came
over his face.

"I am all expectation, Basil," continued his companion, glancing at him.

"Oh, there is really very little to tell, Harry," answered the painter;
"and I am afraid you will hardly understand it.  Perhaps you will
hardly believe it."

Lord Henry smiled, and leaning down, plucked a pink-petalled daisy from
the grass and examined it.  "I am quite sure I shall understand it," he
replied, gazing intently at the little golden, white-feathered disk,
"and as for believing things, I can believe anything, provided that it
is quite incredible."

The wind shook some blossoms from the trees, and the heavy
lilac-blooms, with their clustering stars, moved to and fro in the
languid air.  A grasshopper began to chirrup by the wall, and like a
blue thread a long thin dragon-fly floated past on its brown gauze
wings.  Lord Henry felt as if he could hear Basil Hallward's heart
beating, and wondered what was coming.

"The story is simply this," said the painter after some time.  "Two
months ago I went to a crush at Lady Brandon's. You know we poor
artists have to show ourselves in society from time to time, just to
remind the public that we are not savages.  With an evening coat and a
white tie, as you told me once, anybody, even a stock-broker, can gain
a reputation for being civilized.  Well, after I had been in the room
about ten minutes, talking to huge overdressed dowagers and tedious
academicians, I suddenly became conscious that some one was looking at
me.  I turned half-way round and saw Dorian Gray for the first time.
When our eyes met, I felt that I was growing pale.  A curious sensation
of terror came over me.  I knew that I had come face to face with some
one whose mere personality was so fascinating that, if I allowed it to
do so, it would absorb my whole nature, my whole soul, my very art
itself.  I did not want any external influence in my life.  You know
yourself, Harry, how independent I am by nature.  I have always been my
own master; had at least always been so, till I met Dorian Gray.
Then--but I don't know how to explain it to you.  Something seemed to
tell me that I was on the verge of a terrible crisis in my life.  I had
a strange feeling that fate had in store for me exquisite joys and
exquisite sorrows.  I grew afraid and turned to quit the room.  It was
not conscience that made me do so:  it was a sort of cowardice.  I take
no credit to myself for trying to escape."

"Conscience and cowardice are really the same things, Basil.
Conscience is the trade-name of the firm.  That is all."

"I don't believe that, Harry, and I don't believe you do either.
However, whatever was my motive--and it may have been pride, for I used
to be very proud--I certainly struggled to the door.  There, of course,
I stumbled against Lady Brandon.  'You are not going to run away so
soon, Mr. Hallward?' she screamed out.  You know her curiously shrill
voice?"

"Yes; she is a peacock in everything but beauty," said Lord Henry,
pulling the daisy to bits with his long nervous fingers.

"I could not get rid of her.  She brought me up to royalties, and
people with stars and garters, and elderly ladies with gigantic tiaras
and parrot noses.  She spoke of me as her dearest friend.  I had only
met her once before, but she took it into her head to lionize me.  I
believe some picture of mine had made a great success at the time, at
least had been chattered about in the penny newspapers, which is the
nineteenth-century standard of immortality.  Suddenly I found myself
face to face with the young man whose personality had so strangely
stirred me.  We were quite close, almost touching.  Our eyes met again.
It was reckless of me, but I asked Lady Brandon to introduce me to him.
Perhaps it was not so reckless, after all.  It was simply inevitable.
We would have spoken to each other without any introduction.  I am sure
of that.  Dorian told me so afterwards.  He, too, felt that we were
destined to know each other."

"And how did Lady Brandon describe this wonderful young man?" asked his
companion.  "I know she goes in for giving a rapid _precis_ of all her
guests.  I remember her bringing me up to a truculent and red-faced old
gentleman covered all over with orders and ribbons, and hissing into my
ear, in a tragic whisper which must have been perfectly audible to
everybody in the room, the most astounding details.  I simply fled.  I
like to find out people for myself.  But Lady Brandon treats her guests
exactly as an auctioneer treats his goods.  She either explains them
entirely away, or tells one everything about them except what one wants
to know."

"Poor Lady Brandon!  You are hard on her, Harry!" said Hallward
listlessly.

"My dear fellow, she tried to found a _salon_, and only succeeded in
opening a restaurant.  How could I admire her?  But tell me, what did
she say about Mr. Dorian Gray?"

"Oh, something like, 'Charming boy--poor dear mother and I absolutely
inseparable.  Quite forget what he does--afraid he--doesn't do
anything--oh, yes, plays the piano--or is it the violin, dear Mr.
Gray?'  Neither of us could help laughing, and we became friends at
once."

"Laughter is not at all a bad beginning for a friendship, and it is far
the best ending for one," said the young lord, plucking another daisy.

Hallward shook his head.  "You don't understand what friendship is,
Harry," he murmured--"or what enmity is, for that matter.  You like
every one; that is to say, you are indifferent to every one."

"How horribly unjust of you!" cried Lord Henry, tilting his hat back
and looking up at the little clouds that, like ravelled skeins of
glossy white silk, were drifting across the hollowed turquoise of the
summer sky.  "Yes; horribly unjust of you.  I make a great difference
between people.  I choose my friends for their good looks, my
acquaintances for their good characters, and my enemies for their good
intellects.  A man cannot be too careful in the choice of his enemies.
I have not got one who is a fool.  They are all men of some
intellectual power, and consequently they all appreciate me.  Is that
very vain of me?  I think it is rather vain."

"I should think it was, Harry.  But according to your category I must
be merely an acquaintance."

"My dear old Basil, you are much more than an acquaintance."

"And much less than a friend.  A sort of brother, I suppose?"

"Oh, brothers!  I don't care for brothers.  My elder brother won't die,
and my younger brothers seem never to do anything else."

"Harry!" exclaimed Hallward, frowning.

"My dear fellow, I am not quite serious.  But I can't help detesting my
relations.  I suppose it comes from the fact that none of us can stand
other people having the same faults as ourselves.  I quite sympathize
with the rage of the English democracy against what they call the vices
of the upper orders.  The masses feel that drunkenness, stupidity, and
immorality should be their own special property, and that if any one of
us makes an ass of himself, he is poaching on their preserves.  When
poor Southwark got into the divorce court, their indignation was quite
magnificent.  And yet I don't suppose that ten per cent of the
proletariat live correctly."

"I don't agree with a single word that you have said, and, what is
more, Harry, I feel sure you don't either."

Lord Henry stroked his pointed brown beard and tapped the toe of his
patent-leather boot with a tasselled ebony cane.  "How English you are
Basil!  That is the second time you have made that observation.  If one
puts forward an idea to a true Englishman--always a rash thing to
do--he never dreams of considering whether the idea is right or wrong.
The only thing he considers of any importance is whether one believes
it oneself.  Now, the value of an idea has nothing whatsoever to do
with the sincerity of the man who expresses it.  Indeed, the
probabilities are that the more insincere the man is, the more purely
intellectual will the idea be, as in that case it will not be coloured
by either his wants, his desires, or his prejudices.  However, I don't
propose to discuss politics, sociology, or metaphysics with you.  I
like persons better than principles, and I like persons with no
principles better than anything else in the world.  Tell me more about
Mr. Dorian Gray.  How often do you see him?"

"Every day.  I couldn't be happy if I didn't see him every day.  He is
absolutely necessary to me."

"How extraordinary!  I thought you would never care for anything but
your art."

"He is all my art to me now," said the painter gravely.  "I sometimes
think, Harry, that there are only two eras of any importance in the
world's history.  The first is the appearance of a new medium for art,
and the second is the appearance of a new personality for art also.
What the invention of oil-painting was to the Venetians, the face of
Antinous was to late Greek sculpture, and the face of Dorian Gray will
some day be to me.  It is not merely that I paint from him, draw from
him, sketch from him.  Of course, I have done all that.  But he is much
more to me than a model or a sitter.  I won't tell you that I am
dissatisfied with what I have done of him, or that his beauty is such
that art cannot express it.  There is nothing that art cannot express,
and I know that the work I have done, since I met Dorian Gray, is good
work, is the best work of my life.  But in some curious way--I wonder
will you understand me?--his personality has suggested to me an
entirely new manner in art, an entirely new mode of style.  I see
things differently, I think of them differently.  I can now recreate
life in a way that was hidden from me before.  'A dream of form in days
of thought'--who is it who says that?  I forget; but it is what Dorian
Gray has been to me.  The merely visible presence of this lad--for he
seems to me little more than a lad, though he is really over
twenty--his merely visible presence--ah!  I wonder can you realize all
that that means?  Unconsciously he defines for me the lines of a fresh
school, a school that is to have in it all the passion of the romantic
spirit, all the perfection of the spirit that is Greek.  The harmony of
soul and body--how much that is!  We in our madness have separated the
two, and have invented a realism that is vulgar, an ideality that is
void.  Harry! if you only knew what Dorian Gray is to me!  You remember
that landscape of mine, for which Agnew offered me such a huge price
but which I would not part with?  It is one of the best things I have
ever done.  And why is it so?  Because, while I was painting it, Dorian
Gray sat beside me.  Some subtle influence passed from him to me, and
for the first time in my life I saw in the plain woodland the wonder I
had always looked for and always missed."

"Basil, this is extraordinary!  I must see Dorian Gray."

Hallward got up from the seat and walked up and down the garden.  After
some time he came back.  "Harry," he said, "Dorian Gray is to me simply
a motive in art.  You might see nothing in him.  I see everything in
him.  He is never more present in my work than when no image of him is
there.  He is a suggestion, as I have said, of a new manner.  I find
him in the curves of certain lines, in the loveliness and subtleties of
certain colours.  That is all."

"Then why won't you exhibit his portrait?" asked Lord Henry.

"Because, without intending it, I have put into it some expression of
all this curious artistic idolatry, of which, of course, I have never
cared to speak to him.  He knows nothing about it.  He shall never know
anything about it.  But the world might guess it, and I will not bare
my soul to their shallow prying eyes.  My heart shall never be put
under their microscope.  There is too much of myself in the thing,
Harry--too much of myself!"

"Poets are not so scrupulous as you are.  They know how useful passion
is for publication.  Nowadays a broken heart will run to many editions."

"I hate them for it," cried Hallward.  "An artist should create
beautiful things, but should put nothing of his own life into them.  We
live in an age when men treat art as if it were meant to be a form of
autobiography.  We have lost the abstract sense of beauty.  Some day I
will show the world what it is; and for that reason the world shall
never see my portrait of Dorian Gray."

"I think you are wrong, Basil, but I won't argue with you.  It is only
the intellectually lost who ever argue.  Tell me, is Dorian Gray very
fond of you?"

The painter considered for a few moments.  "He likes me," he answered
after a pause; "I know he likes me.  Of course I flatter him
dreadfully.  I find a strange pleasure in saying things to him that I
know I shall be sorry for having said.  As a rule, he is charming to
me, and we sit in the studio and talk of a thousand things.  Now and
then, however, he is horribly thoughtless, and seems to take a real
delight in giving me pain.  Then I feel, Harry, that I have given away
my whole soul to some one who treats it as if it were a flower to put
in his coat, a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament for a
summer's day."

"Days in summer, Basil, are apt to linger," murmured Lord Henry.
"Perhaps you will tire sooner than he will.  It is a sad thing to think
of, but there is no doubt that genius lasts longer than beauty.  That
accounts for the fact that we all take such pains to over-educate
ourselves.  In the wild struggle for existence, we want to have
something that endures, and so we fill our minds with rubbish and
facts, in the silly hope of keeping our place.  The thoroughly
well-informed man--that is the modern ideal.  And the mind of the
thoroughly well-informed man is a dreadful thing.  It is like a
_bric-a-brac_ shop, all monsters and dust, with everything priced above
its proper value.  I think you will tire first, all the same.  Some day
you will look at your friend, and he will seem to you to be a little
out of drawing, or you won't like his tone of colour, or something.
You will bitterly reproach him in your own heart, and seriously think
that he has behaved very badly to you.  The next time he calls, you
will be perfectly cold and indifferent.  It will be a great pity, for
it will alter you.  What you have told me is quite a romance, a romance
of art one might call it, and the worst of having a romance of any kind
is that it leaves one so unromantic."

"Harry, don't talk like that.  As long as I live, the personality of
Dorian Gray will dominate me.  You can't feel what I feel.  You change
too often."

"Ah, my dear Basil, that is exactly why I can feel it.  Those who are
faithful know only the trivial side of love: it is the faithless who
know love's tragedies."  And Lord Henry struck a light on a dainty
silver case and began to smoke a cigarette with a self-conscious and
satisfied air, as if he had summed up the world in a phrase.  There was
a rustle of chirruping sparrows in the green lacquer leaves of the ivy,
and the blue cloud-shadows chased themselves across the grass like
swallows.  How pleasant it was in the garden!  And how delightful other
people's emotions were!--much more delightful than their ideas, it
seemed to him.  One's own soul, and the passions of one's
friends--those were the fascinating things in life.  He pictured to
himself with silent amusement the tedious luncheon that he had missed
by staying so long with Basil Hallward.  Had he gone to his aunt's, he
would have been sure to have met Lord Goodbody there, and the whole
conversation would have been about the feeding of the poor and the
necessity for model lodging-houses. Each class would have preached the
importance of those virtues, for whose exercise there was no necessity
in their own lives.  The rich would have spoken on the value of thrift,
and the idle grown eloquent over the dignity of labour.  It was
charming to have escaped all that!  As he thought of his aunt, an idea
seemed to strike him.  He turned to Hallward and said, "My dear fellow,
I have just remembered."

"Remembered what, Harry?"

"Where I heard the name of Dorian Gray."

"Where was it?" asked Hallward, with a slight frown.

"Don't look so angry, Basil.  It was at my aunt, Lady Agatha's.  She
told me she had discovered a wonderful young man who was going to help
her in the East End, and that his name was Dorian Gray.  I am bound to
state that she never told me he was good-looking. Women have no
appreciation of good looks; at least, good women have not.  She said
that he was very earnest and had a beautiful nature.  I at once
pictured to myself a creature with spectacles and lank hair, horribly
freckled, and tramping about on huge feet.  I wish I had known it was
your friend."

"I am very glad you didn't, Harry."

"Why?"

"I don't want you to meet him."

"You don't want me to meet him?"

"No."

"Mr. Dorian Gray is in the studio, sir," said the butler, coming into
the garden.

"You must introduce me now," cried Lord Henry, laughing.

The painter turned to his servant, who stood blinking in the sunlight.
"Ask Mr. Gray to wait, Parker:  I shall be in in a few moments." The
man bowed and went up the walk.

Then he looked at Lord Henry.  "Dorian Gray is my dearest friend," he
said.  "He has a simple and a beautiful nature.  Your aunt was quite
right in what she said of him.  Don't spoil him.  Don't try to
influence him.  Your influence would be bad.  The world is wide, and
has many marvellous people in it.  Don't take away from me the one
person who gives to my art whatever charm it possesses:  my life as an
artist depends on him.  Mind, Harry, I trust you."  He spoke very
slowly, and the words seemed wrung out of him almost against his will.

"What nonsense you talk!" said Lord Henry, smiling, and taking Hallward
by the arm, he almost led him into the house.



CHAPTER 2

As they entered they saw Dorian Gray.  He was seated at the piano, with
his back to them, turning over the pages of a volume of Schumann's
"Forest Scenes."  "You must lend me these, Basil," he cried.  "I want
to learn them.  They are perfectly charming."

"That entirely depends on how you sit to-day, Dorian."

"Oh, I am tired of sitting, and I don't want a life-sized portrait of
myself," answered the lad, swinging round on the music-stool in a
wilful, petulant manner.  When he caught sight of Lord Henry, a faint
blush coloured his cheeks for a moment, and he started up.  "I beg your
pardon, Basil, but I didn't know you had any one with you."

"This is Lord Henry Wotton, Dorian, an old Oxford friend of mine.  I
have just been telling him what a capital sitter you were, and now you
have spoiled everything."

"You have not spoiled my pleasure in meeting you, Mr. Gray," said Lord
Henry, stepping forward and extending his hand.  "My aunt has often
spoken to me about you.  You are one of her favourites, and, I am
afraid, one of her victims also."

"I am in Lady Agatha's black books at present," answered Dorian with a
funny look of penitence.  "I promised to go to a club in Whitechapel
with her last Tuesday, and I really forgot all about it.  We were to
have played a duet together--three duets, I believe.  I don't know what
she will say to me.  I am far too frightened to call."

"Oh, I will make your peace with my aunt.  She is quite devoted to you.
And I don't think it really matters about your not being there.  The
audience probably thought it was a duet.  When Aunt Agatha sits down to
the piano, she makes quite enough noise for two people."

"That is very horrid to her, and not very nice to me," answered Dorian,
laughing.

Lord Henry looked at him.  Yes, he was certainly wonderfully handsome,
with his finely curved scarlet lips, his frank blue eyes, his crisp
gold hair.  There was something in his face that made one trust him at
once.  All the candour of youth was there, as well as all youth's
passionate purity.  One felt that he had kept himself unspotted from
the world.  No wonder Basil Hallward worshipped him.

"You are too charming to go in for philanthropy, Mr. Gray--far too
charming." And Lord Henry flung himself down on the divan and opened
his cigarette-case.

The painter had been busy mixing his colours and getting his brushes
ready.  He was looking worried, and when he heard Lord Henry's last
remark, he glanced at him, hesitated for a moment, and then said,
"Harry, I want to finish this picture to-day. Would you think it
awfully rude of me if I asked you to go away?"

Lord Henry smiled and looked at Dorian Gray.  "Am I to go, Mr. Gray?"
he asked.

"Oh, please don't, Lord Henry.  I see that Basil is in one of his sulky
moods, and I can't bear him when he sulks.  Besides, I want you to tell
me why I should not go in for philanthropy."

"I don't know that I shall tell you that, Mr. Gray.  It is so tedious a
subject that one would have to talk seriously about it.  But I
certainly shall not run away, now that you have asked me to stop.  You
don't really mind, Basil, do you?  You have often told me that you
liked your sitters to have some one to chat to."

Hallward bit his lip.  "If Dorian wishes it, of course you must stay.
Dorian's whims are laws to everybody, except himself."

Lord Henry took up his hat and gloves.  "You are very pressing, Basil,
but I am afraid I must go.  I have promised to meet a man at the
Orleans.  Good-bye, Mr. Gray.  Come and see me some afternoon in Curzon
Street.  I am nearly always at home at five o'clock. Write to me when
you are coming.  I should be sorry to miss you."

"Basil," cried Dorian Gray, "if Lord Henry Wotton goes, I shall go,
too.  You never open your lips while you are painting, and it is
horribly dull standing on a platform and trying to look pleasant.  Ask
him to stay.  I insist upon it."

"Stay, Harry, to oblige Dorian, and to oblige me," said Hallward,
gazing intently at his picture.  "It is quite true, I never talk when I
am working, and never listen either, and it must be dreadfully tedious
for my unfortunate sitters.  I beg you to stay."

"But what about my man at the Orleans?"

The painter laughed.  "I don't think there will be any difficulty about
that.  Sit down again, Harry.  And now, Dorian, get up on the platform,
and don't move about too much, or pay any attention to what Lord Henry
says.  He has a very bad influence over all his friends, with the
single exception of myself."

Dorian Gray stepped up on the dais with the air of a young Greek
martyr, and made a little _moue_ of discontent to Lord Henry, to whom he
had rather taken a fancy.  He was so unlike Basil.  They made a
delightful contrast.  And he had such a beautiful voice.  After a few
moments he said to him, "Have you really a very bad influence, Lord
Henry?  As bad as Basil says?"

"There is no such thing as a good influence, Mr. Gray.  All influence
is immoral--immoral from the scientific point of view."

"Why?"

"Because to influence a person is to give him one's own soul.  He does
not think his natural thoughts, or burn with his natural passions.  His
virtues are not real to him.  His sins, if there are such things as
sins, are borrowed.  He becomes an echo of some one else's music, an
actor of a part that has not been written for him.  The aim of life is
self-development. To realize one's nature perfectly--that is what each
of us is here for.  People are afraid of themselves, nowadays.  They
have forgotten the highest of all duties, the duty that one owes to
one's self.  Of course, they are charitable.  They feed the hungry and
clothe the beggar.  But their own souls starve, and are naked.  Courage
has gone out of our race.  Perhaps we never really had it.  The terror
of society, which is the basis of morals, the terror of God, which is
the secret of religion--these are the two things that govern us.  And
yet--"

"Just turn your head a little more to the right, Dorian, like a good
boy," said the painter, deep in his work and conscious only that a look
had come into the lad's face that he had never seen there before.

"And yet," continued Lord Henry, in his low, musical voice, and with
that graceful wave of the hand that was always so characteristic of
him, and that he had even in his Eton days, "I believe that if one man
were to live out his life fully and completely, were to give form to
every feeling, expression to every thought, reality to every dream--I
believe that the world would gain such a fresh impulse of joy that we
would forget all the maladies of mediaevalism, and return to the
Hellenic ideal--to something finer, richer than the Hellenic ideal, it
may be.  But the bravest man amongst us is afraid of himself.  The
mutilation of the savage has its tragic survival in the self-denial
that mars our lives.  We are punished for our refusals.  Every impulse
that we strive to strangle broods in the mind and poisons us.  The body
sins once, and has done with its sin, for action is a mode of
purification.  Nothing remains then but the recollection of a pleasure,
or the luxury of a regret.  The only way to get rid of a temptation is
to yield to it.  Resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing for
the things it has forbidden to itself, with desire for what its
monstrous laws have made monstrous and unlawful.  It has been said that
the great events of the world take place in the brain.  It is in the
brain, and the brain only, that the great sins of the world take place
also.  You, Mr. Gray, you yourself, with your rose-red youth and your
rose-white boyhood, you have had passions that have made you afraid,
thoughts that have filled you with terror, day-dreams and sleeping
dreams whose mere memory might stain your cheek with shame--"

"Stop!" faltered Dorian Gray, "stop! you bewilder me.  I don't know
what to say.  There is some answer to you, but I cannot find it.  Don't
speak.  Let me think.  Or, rather, let me try not to think."

For nearly ten minutes he stood there, motionless, with parted lips and
eyes strangely bright.  He was dimly conscious that entirely fresh
influences were at work within him.  Yet they seemed to him to have
come really from himself.  The few words that Basil's friend had said
to him--words spoken by chance, no doubt, and with wilful paradox in
them--had touched some secret chord that had never been touched before,
but that he felt was now vibrating and throbbing to curious pulses.

Music had stirred him like that.  Music had troubled him many times.
But music was not articulate.  It was not a new world, but rather
another chaos, that it created in us.  Words!  Mere words!  How
terrible they were!  How clear, and vivid, and cruel!  One could not
escape from them.  And yet what a subtle magic there was in them!  They
seemed to be able to give a plastic form to formless things, and to
have a music of their own as sweet as that of viol or of lute.  Mere
words!  Was there anything so real as words?

Yes; there had been things in his boyhood that he had not understood.
He understood them now.  Life suddenly became fiery-coloured to him.
It seemed to him that he had been walking in fire.  Why had he not
known it?

With his subtle smile, Lord Henry watched him.  He knew the precise
psychological moment when to say nothing.  He felt intensely
interested.  He was amazed at the sudden impression that his words had
produced, and, remembering a book that he had read when he was sixteen,
a book which had revealed to him much that he had not known before, he
wondered whether Dorian Gray was passing through a similar experience.
He had merely shot an arrow into the air.  Had it hit the mark?  How
fascinating the lad was!

Hallward painted away with that marvellous bold touch of his, that had
the true refinement and perfect delicacy that in art, at any rate comes
only from strength.  He was unconscious of the silence.

"Basil, I am tired of standing," cried Dorian Gray suddenly.  "I must
go out and sit in the garden.  The air is stifling here."

"My dear fellow, I am so sorry.  When I am painting, I can't think of
anything else.  But you never sat better.  You were perfectly still.
And I have caught the effect I wanted--the half-parted lips and the
bright look in the eyes.  I don't know what Harry has been saying to
you, but he has certainly made you have the most wonderful expression.
I suppose he has been paying you compliments.  You mustn't believe a
word that he says."

"He has certainly not been paying me compliments.  Perhaps that is the
reason that I don't believe anything he has told me."

"You know you believe it all," said Lord Henry, looking at him with his
dreamy languorous eyes.  "I will go out to the garden with you.  It is
horribly hot in the studio.  Basil, let us have something iced to
drink, something with strawberries in it."

"Certainly, Harry.  Just touch the bell, and when Parker comes I will
tell him what you want.  I have got to work up this background, so I
will join you later on.  Don't keep Dorian too long.  I have never been
in better form for painting than I am to-day. This is going to be my
masterpiece.  It is my masterpiece as it stands."

Lord Henry went out to the garden and found Dorian Gray burying his
face in the great cool lilac-blossoms, feverishly drinking in their
perfume as if it had been wine.  He came close to him and put his hand
upon his shoulder.  "You are quite right to do that," he murmured.
"Nothing can cure the soul but the senses, just as nothing can cure the
senses but the soul."

The lad started and drew back.  He was bareheaded, and the leaves had
tossed his rebellious curls and tangled all their gilded threads.
There was a look of fear in his eyes, such as people have when they are
suddenly awakened.  His finely chiselled nostrils quivered, and some
hidden nerve shook the scarlet of his lips and left them trembling.

"Yes," continued Lord Henry, "that is one of the great secrets of
life--to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means
of the soul.  You are a wonderful creation.  You know more than you
think you know, just as you know less than you want to know."

Dorian Gray frowned and turned his head away.  He could not help liking
the tall, graceful young man who was standing by him.  His romantic,
olive-coloured face and worn expression interested him.  There was
something in his low languid voice that was absolutely fascinating.
His cool, white, flowerlike hands, even, had a curious charm.  They
moved, as he spoke, like music, and seemed to have a language of their
own.  But he felt afraid of him, and ashamed of being afraid.  Why had
it been left for a stranger to reveal him to himself?  He had known
Basil Hallward for months, but the friendship between them had never
altered him.  Suddenly there had come some one across his life who
seemed to have disclosed to him life's mystery.  And, yet, what was
there to be afraid of?  He was not a schoolboy or a girl.  It was
absurd to be frightened.

"Let us go and sit in the shade," said Lord Henry.  "Parker has brought
out the drinks, and if you stay any longer in this glare, you will be
quite spoiled, and Basil will never paint you again.  You really must
not allow yourself to become sunburnt.  It would be unbecoming."

"What can it matter?" cried Dorian Gray, laughing, as he sat down on
the seat at the end of the garden.

"It should matter everything to you, Mr. Gray."

"Why?"

"Because you have the most marvellous youth, and youth is the one thing
worth having."

"I don't feel that, Lord Henry."

"No, you don't feel it now.  Some day, when you are old and wrinkled
and ugly, when thought has seared your forehead with its lines, and
passion branded your lips with its hideous fires, you will feel it, you
will feel it terribly.  Now, wherever you go, you charm the world.
Will it always be so? ... You have a wonderfully beautiful face, Mr.
Gray.  Don't frown.  You have.  And beauty is a form of genius--is
higher, indeed, than genius, as it needs no explanation.  It is of the
great facts of the world, like sunlight, or spring-time, or the
reflection in dark waters of that silver shell we call the moon.  It
cannot be questioned.  It has its divine right of sovereignty.  It
makes princes of those who have it.  You smile?  Ah! when you have lost
it you won't smile.... People say sometimes that beauty is only
superficial.  That may be so, but at least it is not so superficial as
thought is.  To me, beauty is the wonder of wonders.  It is only
shallow people who do not judge by appearances.  The true mystery of
the world is the visible, not the invisible.... Yes, Mr. Gray, the
gods have been good to you.  But what the gods give they quickly take
away.  You have only a few years in which to live really, perfectly,
and fully.  When your youth goes, your beauty will go with it, and then
you will suddenly discover that there are no triumphs left for you, or
have to content yourself with those mean triumphs that the memory of
your past will make more bitter than defeats.  Every month as it wanes
brings you nearer to something dreadful.  Time is jealous of you, and
wars against your lilies and your roses.  You will become sallow, and
hollow-cheeked, and dull-eyed.  You will suffer horribly.... Ah!
realize your youth while you have it.  Don't squander the gold of your
days, listening to the tedious, trying to improve the hopeless failure,
or giving away your life to the ignorant, the common, and the vulgar.
These are the sickly aims, the false ideals, of our age.  Live!  Live
the wonderful life that is in you!  Let nothing be lost upon you.  Be
always searching for new sensations.  Be afraid of nothing.... A new
Hedonism--that is what our century wants.  You might be its visible
symbol.  With your personality there is nothing you could not do.  The
world belongs to you for a season.... The moment I met you I saw that
you were quite unconscious of what you really are, of what you really
might be.  There was so much in you that charmed me that I felt I must
tell you something about yourself.  I thought how tragic it would be if
you were wasted.  For there is such a little time that your youth will
last--such a little time.  The common hill-flowers wither, but they
blossom again.  The laburnum will be as yellow next June as it is now.
In a month there will be purple stars on the clematis, and year after
year the green night of its leaves will hold its purple stars.  But we
never get back our youth.  The pulse of joy that beats in us at twenty
becomes sluggish.  Our limbs fail, our senses rot.  We degenerate into
hideous puppets, haunted by the memory of the passions of which we were
too much afraid, and the exquisite temptations that we had not the
courage to yield to.  Youth!  Youth!  There is absolutely nothing in
the world but youth!"

Dorian Gray listened, open-eyed and wondering.  The spray of lilac fell
from his hand upon the gravel.  A furry bee came and buzzed round it
for a moment.  Then it began to scramble all over the oval stellated
globe of the tiny blossoms.  He watched it with that strange interest
in trivial things that we try to develop when things of high import
make us afraid, or when we are stirred by some new emotion for which we
cannot find expression, or when some thought that terrifies us lays
sudden siege to the brain and calls on us to yield.  After a time the
bee flew away.  He saw it creeping into the stained trumpet of a Tyrian
convolvulus.  The flower seemed to quiver, and then swayed gently to
and fro.

Suddenly the painter appeared at the door of the studio and made
staccato signs for them to come in.  They turned to each other and
smiled.

"I am waiting," he cried.  "Do come in.  The light is quite perfect,
and you can bring your drinks."

They rose up and sauntered down the walk together.  Two green-and-white
butterflies fluttered past them, and in the pear-tree at the corner of
the garden a thrush began to sing.

"You are glad you have met me, Mr. Gray," said Lord Henry, looking at
him.

"Yes, I am glad now.  I wonder shall I always be glad?"

"Always!  That is a dreadful word.  It makes me shudder when I hear it.
Women are so fond of using it.  They spoil every romance by trying to
make it last for ever.  It is a meaningless word, too.  The only
difference between a caprice and a lifelong passion is that the caprice
lasts a little longer."

As they entered the studio, Dorian Gray put his hand upon Lord Henry's
arm.  "In that case, let our friendship be a caprice," he murmured,
flushing at his own boldness, then stepped up on the platform and
resumed his pose.

Lord Henry flung himself into a large wicker arm-chair and watched him.
The sweep and dash of the brush on the canvas made the only sound that
broke the stillness, except when, now and then, Hallward stepped back
to look at his work from a distance.  In the slanting beams that
streamed through the open doorway the dust danced and was golden.  The
heavy scent of the roses seemed to brood over everything.

After about a quarter of an hour Hallward stopped painting, looked for
a long time at Dorian Gray, and then for a long time at the picture,
biting the end of one of his huge brushes and frowning.  "It is quite
finished," he cried at last, and stooping down he wrote his name in
long vermilion letters on the left-hand corner of the canvas.

Lord Henry came over and examined the picture.  It was certainly a
wonderful work of art, and a wonderful likeness as well.

"My dear fellow, I congratulate you most warmly," he said.  "It is the
finest portrait of modern times.  Mr. Gray, come over and look at
yourself."

The lad started, as if awakened from some dream.

"Is it really finished?" he murmured, stepping down from the platform.

"Quite finished," said the painter.  "And you have sat splendidly
to-day. I am awfully obliged to you."

"That is entirely due to me," broke in Lord Henry.  "Isn't it, Mr.
Gray?"

Dorian made no answer, but passed listlessly in front of his picture
and turned towards it.  When he saw it he drew back, and his cheeks
flushed for a moment with pleasure.  A look of joy came into his eyes,
as if he had recognized himself for the first time.  He stood there
motionless and in wonder, dimly conscious that Hallward was speaking to
him, but not catching the meaning of his words.  The sense of his own
beauty came on him like a revelation.  He had never felt it before.
Basil Hallward's compliments had seemed to him to be merely the
charming exaggeration of friendship.  He had listened to them, laughed
at them, forgotten them.  They had not influenced his nature.  Then had
come Lord Henry Wotton with his strange panegyric on youth, his
terrible warning of its brevity.  That had stirred him at the time, and
now, as he stood gazing at the shadow of his own loveliness, the full
reality of the description flashed across him.  Yes, there would be a
day when his face would be wrinkled and wizen, his eyes dim and
colourless, the grace of his figure broken and deformed.  The scarlet
would pass away from his lips and the gold steal from his hair.  The
life that was to make his soul would mar his body.  He would become
dreadful, hideous, and uncouth.

As he thought of it, a sharp pang of pain struck through him like a
knife and made each delicate fibre of his nature quiver.  His eyes
deepened into amethyst, and across them came a mist of tears.  He felt
as if a hand of ice had been laid upon his heart.

"Don't you like it?" cried Hallward at last, stung a little by the
lad's silence, not understanding what it meant.

"Of course he likes it," said Lord Henry.  "Who wouldn't like it?  It
is one of the greatest things in modern art.  I will give you anything
you like to ask for it.  I must have it."

"It is not my property, Harry."

"Whose property is it?"

"Dorian's, of course," answered the painter.

"He is a very lucky fellow."

"How sad it is!" murmured Dorian Gray with his eyes still fixed upon
his own portrait.  "How sad it is!  I shall grow old, and horrible, and
dreadful.  But this picture will remain always young.  It will never be
older than this particular day of June.... If it were only the other
way!  If it were I who was to be always young, and the picture that was
to grow old!  For that--for that--I would give everything!  Yes, there
is nothing in the whole world I would not give!  I would give my soul
for that!"

"You would hardly care for such an arrangement, Basil," cried Lord
Henry, laughing.  "It would be rather hard lines on your work."

"I should object very strongly, Harry," said Hallward.

Dorian Gray turned and looked at him.  "I believe you would, Basil.
You like your art better than your friends.  I am no more to you than a
green bronze figure.  Hardly as much, I dare say."

The painter stared in amazement.  It was so unlike Dorian to speak like
that.  What had happened?  He seemed quite angry.  His face was flushed
and his cheeks burning.

"Yes," he continued, "I am less to you than your ivory Hermes or your
silver Faun.  You will like them always.  How long will you like me?
Till I have my first wrinkle, I suppose.  I know, now, that when one
loses one's good looks, whatever they may be, one loses everything.
Your picture has taught me that.  Lord Henry Wotton is perfectly right.
Youth is the only thing worth having.  When I find that I am growing
old, I shall kill myself."

Hallward turned pale and caught his hand.  "Dorian!  Dorian!" he cried,
"don't talk like that.  I have never had such a friend as you, and I
shall never have such another.  You are not jealous of material things,
are you?--you who are finer than any of them!"

"I am jealous of everything whose beauty does not die.  I am jealous of
the portrait you have painted of me.  Why should it keep what I must
lose?  Every moment that passes takes something from me and gives
something to it.  Oh, if it were only the other way!  If the picture
could change, and I could be always what I am now!  Why did you paint
it?  It will mock me some day--mock me horribly!"  The hot tears welled
into his eyes; he tore his hand away and, flinging himself on the
divan, he buried his face in the cushions, as though he was praying.

"This is your doing, Harry," said the painter bitterly.

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.  "It is the real Dorian Gray--that
is all."

"It is not."

"If it is not, what have I to do with it?"

"You should have gone away when I asked you," he muttered.

"I stayed when you asked me," was Lord Henry's answer.

"Harry, I can't quarrel with my two best friends at once, but between
you both you have made me hate the finest piece of work I have ever
done, and I will destroy it.  What is it but canvas and colour?  I will
not let it come across our three lives and mar them."

Dorian Gray lifted his golden head from the pillow, and with pallid
face and tear-stained eyes, looked at him as he walked over to the deal
painting-table that was set beneath the high curtained window.  What
was he doing there?  His fingers were straying about among the litter
of tin tubes and dry brushes, seeking for something.  Yes, it was for
the long palette-knife, with its thin blade of lithe steel.  He had
found it at last.  He was going to rip up the canvas.

With a stifled sob the lad leaped from the couch, and, rushing over to
Hallward, tore the knife out of his hand, and flung it to the end of
the studio.  "Don't, Basil, don't!" he cried.  "It would be murder!"

"I am glad you appreciate my work at last, Dorian," said the painter
coldly when he had recovered from his surprise.  "I never thought you
would."

"Appreciate it?  I am in love with it, Basil.  It is part of myself.  I
feel that."

"Well, as soon as you are dry, you shall be varnished, and framed, and
sent home.  Then you can do what you like with yourself." And he walked
across the room and rang the bell for tea.  "You will have tea, of
course, Dorian?  And so will you, Harry?  Or do you object to such
simple pleasures?"

"I adore simple pleasures," said Lord Henry.  "They are the last refuge
of the complex.  But I don't like scenes, except on the stage.  What
absurd fellows you are, both of you!  I wonder who it was defined man
as a rational animal.  It was the most premature definition ever given.
Man is many things, but he is not rational.  I am glad he is not, after
all--though I wish you chaps would not squabble over the picture.  You
had much better let me have it, Basil.  This silly boy doesn't really
want it, and I really do."

"If you let any one have it but me, Basil, I shall never forgive you!"
cried Dorian Gray; "and I don't allow people to call me a silly boy."

"You know the picture is yours, Dorian.  I gave it to you before it
existed."

"And you know you have been a little silly, Mr. Gray, and that you
don't really object to being reminded that you are extremely young."

"I should have objected very strongly this morning, Lord Henry."

"Ah! this morning!  You have lived since then."

There came a knock at the door, and the butler entered with a laden
tea-tray and set it down upon a small Japanese table.  There was a
rattle of cups and saucers and the hissing of a fluted Georgian urn.
Two globe-shaped china dishes were brought in by a page.  Dorian Gray
went over and poured out the tea.  The two men sauntered languidly to
the table and examined what was under the covers.

"Let us go to the theatre to-night," said Lord Henry.  "There is sure
to be something on, somewhere.  I have promised to dine at White's, but
it is only with an old friend, so I can send him a wire to say that I
am ill, or that I am prevented from coming in consequence of a
subsequent engagement.  I think that would be a rather nice excuse:  it
would have all the surprise of candour."

"It is such a bore putting on one's dress-clothes," muttered Hallward.
"And, when one has them on, they are so horrid."

"Yes," answered Lord Henry dreamily, "the costume of the nineteenth
century is detestable.  It is so sombre, so depressing.  Sin is the
only real colour-element left in modern life."

"You really must not say things like that before Dorian, Harry."

"Before which Dorian?  The one who is pouring out tea for us, or the
one in the picture?"

"Before either."

"I should like to come to the theatre with you, Lord Henry," said the
lad.

"Then you shall come; and you will come, too, Basil, won't you?"

"I can't, really.  I would sooner not.  I have a lot of work to do."

"Well, then, you and I will go alone, Mr. Gray."

"I should like that awfully."

The painter bit his lip and walked over, cup in hand, to the picture.
"I shall stay with the real Dorian," he said, sadly.

"Is it the real Dorian?" cried the original of the portrait, strolling
across to him.  "Am I really like that?"

"Yes; you are just like that."

"How wonderful, Basil!"

"At least you are like it in appearance.  But it will never alter,"
sighed Hallward.  "That is something."

"What a fuss people make about fidelity!" exclaimed Lord Henry.  "Why,
even in love it is purely a question for physiology.  It has nothing to
do with our own will.  Young men want to be faithful, and are not; old
men want to be faithless, and cannot: that is all one can say."

"Don't go to the theatre to-night, Dorian," said Hallward.  "Stop and
dine with me."

"I can't, Basil."

"Why?"

"Because I have promised Lord Henry Wotton to go with him."

"He won't like you the better for keeping your promises.  He always
breaks his own.  I beg you not to go."

Dorian Gray laughed and shook his head.

"I entreat you."

The lad hesitated, and looked over at Lord Henry, who was watching them
from the tea-table with an amused smile.

"I must go, Basil," he answered.

"Very well," said Hallward, and he went over and laid down his cup on
the tray.  "It is rather late, and, as you have to dress, you had
better lose no time.  Good-bye, Harry.  Good-bye, Dorian.  Come and see
me soon.  Come to-morrow."

"Certainly."

"You won't forget?"

"No, of course not," cried Dorian.

"And ... Harry!"

"Yes, Basil?"

"Remember what I asked you, when we were in the garden this morning."

"I have forgotten it."

"I trust you."

"I wish I could trust myself," said Lord Henry, laughing.  "Come, Mr.
Gray, my hansom is outside, and I can drop you at your own place.
Good-bye, Basil.  It has been a most interesting afternoon."

As the door closed behind them, the painter flung himself down on a
sofa, and a look of pain came into his face.



CHAPTER 3

At half-past twelve next day Lord Henry Wotton strolled from Curzon
Street over to the Albany to call on his uncle, Lord Fermor, a genial
if somewhat rough-mannered old bachelor, whom the outside world called
selfish because it derived no particular benefit from him, but who was
considered generous by Society as he fed the people who amused him.
His father had been our ambassador at Madrid when Isabella was young
and Prim unthought of, but had retired from the diplomatic service in a
capricious moment of annoyance on not being offered the Embassy at
Paris, a post to which he considered that he was fully entitled by
reason of his birth, his indolence, the good English of his dispatches,
and his inordinate passion for pleasure.  The son, who had been his
father's secretary, had resigned along with his chief, somewhat
foolishly as was thought at the time, and on succeeding some months
later to the title, had set himself to the serious study of the great
aristocratic art of doing absolutely nothing.  He had two large town
houses, but preferred to live in chambers as it was less trouble, and
took most of his meals at his club.  He paid some attention to the
management of his collieries in the Midland counties, excusing himself
for this taint of industry on the ground that the one advantage of
having coal was that it enabled a gentleman to afford the decency of
burning wood on his own hearth.  In politics he was a Tory, except when
the Tories were in office, during which period he roundly abused them
for being a pack of Radicals.  He was a hero to his valet, who bullied
him, and a terror to most of his relations, whom he bullied in turn.
Only England could have produced him, and he always said that the
country was going to the dogs.  His principles were out of date, but
there was a good deal to be said for his prejudices.

When Lord Henry entered the room, he found his uncle sitting in a rough
shooting-coat, smoking a cheroot and grumbling over _The Times_.  "Well,
Harry," said the old gentleman, "what brings you out so early?  I
thought you dandies never got up till two, and were not visible till
five."

"Pure family affection, I assure you, Uncle George.  I want to get
something out of you."

"Money, I suppose," said Lord Fermor, making a wry face.  "Well, sit
down and tell me all about it.  Young people, nowadays, imagine that
money is everything."

"Yes," murmured Lord Henry, settling his button-hole in his coat; "and
when they grow older they know it.  But I don't want money.  It is only
people who pay their bills who want that, Uncle George, and I never pay
mine.  Credit is the capital of a younger son, and one lives charmingly
upon it.  Besides, I always deal with Dartmoor's tradesmen, and
consequently they never bother me.  What I want is information:  not
useful information, of course; useless information."

"Well, I can tell you anything that is in an English Blue Book, Harry,
although those fellows nowadays write a lot of nonsense.  When I was in
the Diplomatic, things were much better.  But I hear they let them in
now by examination.  What can you expect?  Examinations, sir, are pure
humbug from beginning to end.  If a man is a gentleman, he knows quite
enough, and if he is not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad for him."

"Mr. Dorian Gray does not belong to Blue Books, Uncle George," said
Lord Henry languidly.

"Mr. Dorian Gray?  Who is he?" asked Lord Fermor, knitting his bushy
white eyebrows.

"That is what I have come to learn, Uncle George.  Or rather, I know
who he is.  He is the last Lord Kelso's grandson.  His mother was a
Devereux, Lady Margaret Devereux.  I want you to tell me about his
mother.  What was she like?  Whom did she marry?  You have known nearly
everybody in your time, so you might have known her.  I am very much
interested in Mr. Gray at present.  I have only just met him."

"Kelso's grandson!" echoed the old gentleman.  "Kelso's grandson! ...
Of course.... I knew his mother intimately.  I believe I was at her
christening.  She was an extraordinarily beautiful girl, Margaret
Devereux, and made all the men frantic by running away with a penniless
young fellow--a mere nobody, sir, a subaltern in a foot regiment, or
something of that kind.  Certainly.  I remember the whole thing as if
it happened yesterday.  The poor chap was killed in a duel at Spa a few
months after the marriage.  There was an ugly story about it.  They
said Kelso got some rascally adventurer, some Belgian brute, to insult
his son-in-law in public--paid him, sir, to do it, paid him--and that
the fellow spitted his man as if he had been a pigeon.  The thing was
hushed up, but, egad, Kelso ate his chop alone at the club for some
time afterwards.  He brought his daughter back with him, I was told,
and she never spoke to him again.  Oh, yes; it was a bad business.  The
girl died, too, died within a year.  So she left a son, did she?  I had
forgotten that.  What sort of boy is he?  If he is like his mother, he
must be a good-looking chap."

"He is very good-looking," assented Lord Henry.

"I hope he will fall into proper hands," continued the old man.  "He
should have a pot of money waiting for him if Kelso did the right thing
by him.  His mother had money, too.  All the Selby property came to
her, through her grandfather.  Her grandfather hated Kelso, thought him
a mean dog.  He was, too.  Came to Madrid once when I was there.  Egad,
I was ashamed of him.  The Queen used to ask me about the English noble
who was always quarrelling with the cabmen about their fares.  They
made quite a story of it.  I didn't dare show my face at Court for a
month.  I hope he treated his grandson better than he did the jarvies."

"I don't know," answered Lord Henry.  "I fancy that the boy will be
well off.  He is not of age yet.  He has Selby, I know.  He told me so.
And ... his mother was very beautiful?"

"Margaret Devereux was one of the loveliest creatures I ever saw,
Harry.  What on earth induced her to behave as she did, I never could
understand.  She could have married anybody she chose.  Carlington was
mad after her.  She was romantic, though.  All the women of that family
were.  The men were a poor lot, but, egad! the women were wonderful.
Carlington went on his knees to her.  Told me so himself.  She laughed
at him, and there wasn't a girl in London at the time who wasn't after
him.  And by the way, Harry, talking about silly marriages, what is
this humbug your father tells me about Dartmoor wanting to marry an
American?  Ain't English girls good enough for him?"

"It is rather fashionable to marry Americans just now, Uncle George."

"I'll back English women against the world, Harry," said Lord Fermor,
striking the table with his fist.

"The betting is on the Americans."

"They don't last, I am told," muttered his uncle.

"A long engagement exhausts them, but they are capital at a
steeplechase.  They take things flying.  I don't think Dartmoor has a
chance."

"Who are her people?" grumbled the old gentleman.  "Has she got any?"

Lord Henry shook his head.  "American girls are as clever at concealing
their parents, as English women are at concealing their past," he said,
rising to go.

"They are pork-packers, I suppose?"

"I hope so, Uncle George, for Dartmoor's sake.  I am told that
pork-packing is the most lucrative profession in America, after
politics."

"Is she pretty?"

"She behaves as if she was beautiful.  Most American women do.  It is
the secret of their charm."

"Why can't these American women stay in their own country?  They are
always telling us that it is the paradise for women."

"It is.  That is the reason why, like Eve, they are so excessively
anxious to get out of it," said Lord Henry.  "Good-bye, Uncle George.
I shall be late for lunch, if I stop any longer.  Thanks for giving me
the information I wanted.  I always like to know everything about my
new friends, and nothing about my old ones."

"Where are you lunching, Harry?"

"At Aunt Agatha's. I have asked myself and Mr. Gray.  He is her latest
_protege_."

"Humph! tell your Aunt Agatha, Harry, not to bother me any more with
her charity appeals.  I am sick of them.  Why, the good woman thinks
that I have nothing to do but to write cheques for her silly fads."

"All right, Uncle George, I'll tell her, but it won't have any effect.
Philanthropic people lose all sense of humanity.  It is their
distinguishing characteristic."

The old gentleman growled approvingly and rang the bell for his
servant.  Lord Henry passed up the low arcade into Burlington Street
and turned his steps in the direction of Berkeley Square.

So that was the story of Dorian Gray's parentage.  Crudely as it had
been told to him, it had yet stirred him by its suggestion of a
strange, almost modern romance.  A beautiful woman risking everything
for a mad passion.  A few wild weeks of happiness cut short by a
hideous, treacherous crime.  Months of voiceless agony, and then a
child born in pain.  The mother snatched away by death, the boy left to
solitude and the tyranny of an old and loveless man.  Yes; it was an
interesting background.  It posed the lad, made him more perfect, as it
were.  Behind every exquisite thing that existed, there was something
tragic.  Worlds had to be in travail, that the meanest flower might
blow.... And how charming he had been at dinner the night before, as
with startled eyes and lips parted in frightened pleasure he had sat
opposite to him at the club, the red candleshades staining to a richer
rose the wakening wonder of his face.  Talking to him was like playing
upon an exquisite violin.  He answered to every touch and thrill of the
bow.... There was something terribly enthralling in the exercise of
influence.  No other activity was like it.  To project one's soul into
some gracious form, and let it tarry there for a moment; to hear one's
own intellectual views echoed back to one with all the added music of
passion and youth; to convey one's temperament into another as though
it were a subtle fluid or a strange perfume: there was a real joy in
that--perhaps the most satisfying joy left to us in an age so limited
and vulgar as our own, an age grossly carnal in its pleasures, and
grossly common in its aims.... He was a marvellous type, too, this lad,
whom by so curious a chance he had met in Basil's studio, or could be
fashioned into a marvellous type, at any rate.  Grace was his, and the
white purity of boyhood, and beauty such as old Greek marbles kept for
us.  There was nothing that one could not do with him.  He could be
made a Titan or a toy.  What a pity it was that such beauty was
destined to fade! ...  And Basil?  From a psychological point of view,
how interesting he was!  The new manner in art, the fresh mode of
looking at life, suggested so strangely by the merely visible presence
of one who was unconscious of it all; the silent spirit that dwelt in
dim woodland, and walked unseen in open field, suddenly showing
herself, Dryadlike and not afraid, because in his soul who sought for
her there had been wakened that wonderful vision to which alone are
wonderful things revealed; the mere shapes and patterns of things
becoming, as it were, refined, and gaining a kind of symbolical value,
as though they were themselves patterns of some other and more perfect
form whose shadow they made real:  how strange it all was!  He
remembered something like it in history.  Was it not Plato, that artist
in thought, who had first analyzed it?  Was it not Buonarotti who had
carved it in the coloured marbles of a sonnet-sequence? But in our own
century it was strange.... Yes; he would try to be to Dorian Gray
what, without knowing it, the lad was to the painter who had fashioned
the wonderful portrait.  He would seek to dominate him--had already,
indeed, half done so.  He would make that wonderful spirit his own.
There was something fascinating in this son of love and death.

Suddenly he stopped and glanced up at the houses.  He found that he had
passed his aunt's some distance, and, smiling to himself, turned back.
When he entered the somewhat sombre hall, the butler told him that they
had gone in to lunch.  He gave one of the footmen his hat and stick and
passed into the dining-room.

"Late as usual, Harry," cried his aunt, shaking her head at him.

He invented a facile excuse, and having taken the vacant seat next to
her, looked round to see who was there.  Dorian bowed to him shyly from
the end of the table, a flush of pleasure stealing into his cheek.
Opposite was the Duchess of Harley, a lady of admirable good-nature and
good temper, much liked by every one who knew her, and of those ample
architectural proportions that in women who are not duchesses are
described by contemporary historians as stoutness.  Next to her sat, on
her right, Sir Thomas Burdon, a Radical member of Parliament, who
followed his leader in public life and in private life followed the
best cooks, dining with the Tories and thinking with the Liberals, in
accordance with a wise and well-known rule.  The post on her left was
occupied by Mr. Erskine of Treadley, an old gentleman of considerable
charm and culture, who had fallen, however, into bad habits of silence,
having, as he explained once to Lady Agatha, said everything that he
had to say before he was thirty.  His own neighbour was Mrs. Vandeleur,
one of his aunt's oldest friends, a perfect saint amongst women, but so
dreadfully dowdy that she reminded one of a badly bound hymn-book.
Fortunately for him she had on the other side Lord Faudel, a most
intelligent middle-aged mediocrity, as bald as a ministerial statement
in the House of Commons, with whom she was conversing in that intensely
earnest manner which is the one unpardonable error, as he remarked once
himself, that all really good people fall into, and from which none of
them ever quite escape.

"We are talking about poor Dartmoor, Lord Henry," cried the duchess,
nodding pleasantly to him across the table.  "Do you think he will
really marry this fascinating young person?"

"I believe she has made up her mind to propose to him, Duchess."

"How dreadful!" exclaimed Lady Agatha.  "Really, some one should
interfere."

"I am told, on excellent authority, that her father keeps an American
dry-goods store," said Sir Thomas Burdon, looking supercilious.

"My uncle has already suggested pork-packing, Sir Thomas."

"Dry-goods! What are American dry-goods?" asked the duchess, raising
her large hands in wonder and accentuating the verb.

"American novels," answered Lord Henry, helping himself to some quail.

The duchess looked puzzled.

"Don't mind him, my dear," whispered Lady Agatha.  "He never means
anything that he says."

"When America was discovered," said the Radical member--and he began to
give some wearisome facts.  Like all people who try to exhaust a
subject, he exhausted his listeners.  The duchess sighed and exercised
her privilege of interruption.  "I wish to goodness it never had been
discovered at all!" she exclaimed.  "Really, our girls have no chance
nowadays.  It is most unfair."

"Perhaps, after all, America never has been discovered," said Mr.
Erskine; "I myself would say that it had merely been detected."

"Oh! but I have seen specimens of the inhabitants," answered the
duchess vaguely.  "I must confess that most of them are extremely
pretty.  And they dress well, too.  They get all their dresses in
Paris.  I wish I could afford to do the same."

"They say that when good Americans die they go to Paris," chuckled Sir
Thomas, who had a large wardrobe of Humour's cast-off clothes.

"Really!  And where do bad Americans go to when they die?" inquired the
duchess.

"They go to America," murmured Lord Henry.

Sir Thomas frowned.  "I am afraid that your nephew is prejudiced
against that great country," he said to Lady Agatha.  "I have travelled
all over it in cars provided by the directors, who, in such matters,
are extremely civil.  I assure you that it is an education to visit it."

"But must we really see Chicago in order to be educated?" asked Mr.
Erskine plaintively.  "I don't feel up to the journey."

Sir Thomas waved his hand.  "Mr. Erskine of Treadley has the world on
his shelves. We practical men like to see things, not to read about
them. The Americans are an extremely interesting people. They are
absolutely reasonable. I think that is their distinguishing
characteristic. Yes, Mr. Erskine, an absolutely reasonable people. I
assure you there is no nonsense about the Americans."

"How dreadful!" cried Lord Henry.  "I can stand brute force, but brute
reason is quite unbearable.  There is something unfair about its use.
It is hitting below the intellect."

"I do not understand you," said Sir Thomas, growing rather red.

"I do, Lord Henry," murmured Mr. Erskine, with a smile.

"Paradoxes are all very well in their way...." rejoined the baronet.

"Was that a paradox?" asked Mr. Erskine.  "I did not think so.  Perhaps
it was.  Well, the way of paradoxes is the way of truth.  To test
reality we must see it on the tight rope.  When the verities become
acrobats, we can judge them."

"Dear me!" said Lady Agatha, "how you men argue!  I am sure I never can
make out what you are talking about.  Oh!  Harry, I am quite vexed with
you.  Why do you try to persuade our nice Mr. Dorian Gray to give up
the East End?  I assure you he would be quite invaluable.  They would
love his playing."

"I want him to play to me," cried Lord Henry, smiling, and he looked
down the table and caught a bright answering glance.

"But they are so unhappy in Whitechapel," continued Lady Agatha.

"I can sympathize with everything except suffering," said Lord Henry,
shrugging his shoulders.  "I cannot sympathize with that.  It is too
ugly, too horrible, too distressing.  There is something terribly
morbid in the modern sympathy with pain.  One should sympathize with
the colour, the beauty, the joy of life.  The less said about life's
sores, the better."

"Still, the East End is a very important problem," remarked Sir Thomas
with a grave shake of the head.

"Quite so," answered the young lord.  "It is the problem of slavery,
and we try to solve it by amusing the slaves."

The politician looked at him keenly.  "What change do you propose,
then?" he asked.

Lord Henry laughed.  "I don't desire to change anything in England
except the weather," he answered.  "I am quite content with philosophic
contemplation.  But, as the nineteenth century has gone bankrupt
through an over-expenditure of sympathy, I would suggest that we should
appeal to science to put us straight.  The advantage of the emotions is
that they lead us astray, and the advantage of science is that it is
not emotional."

"But we have such grave responsibilities," ventured Mrs. Vandeleur
timidly.

"Terribly grave," echoed Lady Agatha.

Lord Henry looked over at Mr. Erskine.  "Humanity takes itself too
seriously.  It is the world's original sin.  If the caveman had known
how to laugh, history would have been different."

"You are really very comforting," warbled the duchess.  "I have always
felt rather guilty when I came to see your dear aunt, for I take no
interest at all in the East End.  For the future I shall be able to
look her in the face without a blush."

"A blush is very becoming, Duchess," remarked Lord Henry.

"Only when one is young," she answered.  "When an old woman like myself
blushes, it is a very bad sign.  Ah!  Lord Henry, I wish you would tell
me how to become young again."

He thought for a moment.  "Can you remember any great error that you
committed in your early days, Duchess?" he asked, looking at her across
the table.

"A great many, I fear," she cried.

"Then commit them over again," he said gravely.  "To get back one's
youth, one has merely to repeat one's follies."

"A delightful theory!" she exclaimed.  "I must put it into practice."

"A dangerous theory!" came from Sir Thomas's tight lips.  Lady Agatha
shook her head, but could not help being amused.  Mr. Erskine listened.

"Yes," he continued, "that is one of the great secrets of life.
Nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping common sense, and
discover when it is too late that the only things one never regrets are
one's mistakes."

A laugh ran round the table.

He played with the idea and grew wilful; tossed it into the air and
transformed it; let it escape and recaptured it; made it iridescent
with fancy and winged it with paradox.  The praise of folly, as he went
on, soared into a philosophy, and philosophy herself became young, and
catching the mad music of pleasure, wearing, one might fancy, her
wine-stained robe and wreath of ivy, danced like a Bacchante over the
hills of life, and mocked the slow Silenus for being sober.  Facts fled
before her like frightened forest things.  Her white feet trod the huge
press at which wise Omar sits, till the seething grape-juice rose round
her bare limbs in waves of purple bubbles, or crawled in red foam over
the vat's black, dripping, sloping sides.  It was an extraordinary
improvisation.  He felt that the eyes of Dorian Gray were fixed on him,
and the consciousness that amongst his audience there was one whose
temperament he wished to fascinate seemed to give his wit keenness and
to lend colour to his imagination.  He was brilliant, fantastic,
irresponsible.  He charmed his listeners out of themselves, and they
followed his pipe, laughing.  Dorian Gray never took his gaze off him,
but sat like one under a spell, smiles chasing each other over his lips
and wonder growing grave in his darkening eyes.

At last, liveried in the costume of the age, reality entered the room
in the shape of a servant to tell the duchess that her carriage was
waiting.  She wrung her hands in mock despair.  "How annoying!" she
cried.  "I must go.  I have to call for my husband at the club, to take
him to some absurd meeting at Willis's Rooms, where he is going to be
in the chair.  If I am late he is sure to be furious, and I couldn't
have a scene in this bonnet.  It is far too fragile.  A harsh word
would ruin it.  No, I must go, dear Agatha.  Good-bye, Lord Henry, you
are quite delightful and dreadfully demoralizing.  I am sure I don't
know what to say about your views.  You must come and dine with us some
night.  Tuesday?  Are you disengaged Tuesday?"

"For you I would throw over anybody, Duchess," said Lord Henry with a
bow.

"Ah! that is very nice, and very wrong of you," she cried; "so mind you
come"; and she swept out of the room, followed by Lady Agatha and the
other ladies.

When Lord Henry had sat down again, Mr. Erskine moved round, and taking
a chair close to him, placed his hand upon his arm.

"You talk books away," he said; "why don't you write one?"

"I am too fond of reading books to care to write them, Mr. Erskine.  I
should like to write a novel certainly, a novel that would be as lovely
as a Persian carpet and as unreal.  But there is no literary public in
England for anything except newspapers, primers, and encyclopaedias.
Of all people in the world the English have the least sense of the
beauty of literature."

"I fear you are right," answered Mr. Erskine.  "I myself used to have
literary ambitions, but I gave them up long ago.  And now, my dear
young friend, if you will allow me to call you so, may I ask if you
really meant all that you said to us at lunch?"

"I quite forget what I said," smiled Lord Henry.  "Was it all very bad?"

"Very bad indeed.  In fact I consider you extremely dangerous, and if
anything happens to our good duchess, we shall all look on you as being
primarily responsible.  But I should like to talk to you about life.
The generation into which I was born was tedious.  Some day, when you
are tired of London, come down to Treadley and expound to me your
philosophy of pleasure over some admirable Burgundy I am fortunate
enough to possess."

"I shall be charmed.  A visit to Treadley would be a great privilege.
It has a perfect host, and a perfect library."

"You will complete it," answered the old gentleman with a courteous
bow.  "And now I must bid good-bye to your excellent aunt.  I am due at
the Athenaeum.  It is the hour when we sleep there."

"All of you, Mr. Erskine?"

"Forty of us, in forty arm-chairs. We are practising for an English
Academy of Letters."

Lord Henry laughed and rose.  "I am going to the park," he cried.

As he was passing out of the door, Dorian Gray touched him on the arm.
"Let me come with you," he murmured.

"But I thought you had promised Basil Hallward to go and see him,"
answered Lord Henry.

"I would sooner come with you; yes, I feel I must come with you.  Do
let me.  And you will promise to talk to me all the time?  No one talks
so wonderfully as you do."

"Ah!  I have talked quite enough for to-day," said Lord Henry, smiling.
"All I want now is to look at life.  You may come and look at it with
me, if you care to."



CHAPTER 4

One afternoon, a month later, Dorian Gray was reclining in a luxurious
arm-chair, in the little library of Lord Henry's house in Mayfair.  It
was, in its way, a very charming room, with its high panelled
wainscoting of olive-stained oak, its cream-coloured frieze and ceiling
of raised plasterwork, and its brickdust felt carpet strewn with silk,
long-fringed Persian rugs.  On a tiny satinwood table stood a statuette
by Clodion, and beside it lay a copy of Les Cent Nouvelles, bound for
Margaret of Valois by Clovis Eve and powdered with the gilt daisies
that Queen had selected for her device.  Some large blue china jars and
parrot-tulips were ranged on the mantelshelf, and through the small
leaded panes of the window streamed the apricot-coloured light of a
summer day in London.

Lord Henry had not yet come in.  He was always late on principle, his
principle being that punctuality is the thief of time.  So the lad was
looking rather sulky, as with listless fingers he turned over the pages
of an elaborately illustrated edition of Manon Lescaut that he had
found in one of the book-cases. The formal monotonous ticking of the
Louis Quatorze clock annoyed him.  Once or twice he thought of going
away.

At last he heard a step outside, and the door opened.  "How late you
are, Harry!" he murmured.

"I am afraid it is not Harry, Mr. Gray," answered a shrill voice.

He glanced quickly round and rose to his feet.  "I beg your pardon.  I
thought--"

"You thought it was my husband.  It is only his wife.  You must let me
introduce myself.  I know you quite well by your photographs.  I think
my husband has got seventeen of them."

"Not seventeen, Lady Henry?"

"Well, eighteen, then.  And I saw you with him the other night at the
opera."  She laughed nervously as she spoke, and watched him with her
vague forget-me-not eyes.  She was a curious woman, whose dresses
always looked as if they had been designed in a rage and put on in a
tempest.  She was usually in love with somebody, and, as her passion
was never returned, she had kept all her illusions.  She tried to look
picturesque, but only succeeded in being untidy.  Her name was
Victoria, and she had a perfect mania for going to church.

"That was at Lohengrin, Lady Henry, I think?"

"Yes; it was at dear Lohengrin.  I like Wagner's music better than
anybody's. It is so loud that one can talk the whole time without other
people hearing what one says.  That is a great advantage, don't you
think so, Mr. Gray?"

The same nervous staccato laugh broke from her thin lips, and her
fingers began to play with a long tortoise-shell paper-knife.

Dorian smiled and shook his head:  "I am afraid I don't think so, Lady
Henry.  I never talk during music--at least, during good music.  If one
hears bad music, it is one's duty to drown it in conversation."

"Ah! that is one of Harry's views, isn't it, Mr. Gray?  I always hear
Harry's views from his friends.  It is the only way I get to know of
them.  But you must not think I don't like good music.  I adore it, but
I am afraid of it.  It makes me too romantic.  I have simply worshipped
pianists--two at a time, sometimes, Harry tells me.  I don't know what
it is about them.  Perhaps it is that they are foreigners.  They all
are, ain't they?  Even those that are born in England become foreigners
after a time, don't they?  It is so clever of them, and such a
compliment to art.  Makes it quite cosmopolitan, doesn't it?  You have
never been to any of my parties, have you, Mr. Gray?  You must come.  I
can't afford orchids, but I spare no expense in foreigners.  They make
one's rooms look so picturesque.  But here is Harry!  Harry, I came in
to look for you, to ask you something--I forget what it was--and I
found Mr. Gray here.  We have had such a pleasant chat about music.  We
have quite the same ideas.  No; I think our ideas are quite different.
But he has been most pleasant.  I am so glad I've seen him."

"I am charmed, my love, quite charmed," said Lord Henry, elevating his
dark, crescent-shaped eyebrows and looking at them both with an amused
smile.  "So sorry I am late, Dorian.  I went to look after a piece of
old brocade in Wardour Street and had to bargain for hours for it.
Nowadays people know the price of everything and the value of nothing."

"I am afraid I must be going," exclaimed Lady Henry, breaking an
awkward silence with her silly sudden laugh.  "I have promised to drive
with the duchess.  Good-bye, Mr. Gray.  Good-bye, Harry.  You are
dining out, I suppose?  So am I. Perhaps I shall see you at Lady
Thornbury's."

"I dare say, my dear," said Lord Henry, shutting the door behind her
as, looking like a bird of paradise that had been out all night in the
rain, she flitted out of the room, leaving a faint odour of
frangipanni.  Then he lit a cigarette and flung himself down on the
sofa.

"Never marry a woman with straw-coloured hair, Dorian," he said after a
few puffs.

"Why, Harry?"

"Because they are so sentimental."

"But I like sentimental people."

"Never marry at all, Dorian.  Men marry because they are tired; women,
because they are curious:  both are disappointed."

"I don't think I am likely to marry, Harry.  I am too much in love.
That is one of your aphorisms.  I am putting it into practice, as I do
everything that you say."

"Who are you in love with?" asked Lord Henry after a pause.

"With an actress," said Dorian Gray, blushing.

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.  "That is a rather commonplace
_debut_."

"You would not say so if you saw her, Harry."

"Who is she?"

"Her name is Sibyl Vane."

"Never heard of her."

"No one has.  People will some day, however.  She is a genius."

"My dear boy, no woman is a genius.  Women are a decorative sex.  They
never have anything to say, but they say it charmingly.  Women
represent the triumph of matter over mind, just as men represent the
triumph of mind over morals."

"Harry, how can you?"

"My dear Dorian, it is quite true.  I am analysing women at present, so
I ought to know.  The subject is not so abstruse as I thought it was.
I find that, ultimately, there are only two kinds of women, the plain
and the coloured.  The plain women are very useful.  If you want to
gain a reputation for respectability, you have merely to take them down
to supper.  The other women are very charming.  They commit one
mistake, however.  They paint in order to try and look young.  Our
grandmothers painted in order to try and talk brilliantly.  _Rouge_ and
_esprit_ used to go together.  That is all over now.  As long as a woman
can look ten years younger than her own daughter, she is perfectly
satisfied.  As for conversation, there are only five women in London
worth talking to, and two of these can't be admitted into decent
society.  However, tell me about your genius.  How long have you known
her?"

"Ah!  Harry, your views terrify me."

"Never mind that.  How long have you known her?"

"About three weeks."

"And where did you come across her?"

"I will tell you, Harry, but you mustn't be unsympathetic about it.
After all, it never would have happened if I had not met you.  You
filled me with a wild desire to know everything about life.  For days
after I met you, something seemed to throb in my veins.  As I lounged
in the park, or strolled down Piccadilly, I used to look at every one
who passed me and wonder, with a mad curiosity, what sort of lives they
led.  Some of them fascinated me.  Others filled me with terror.  There
was an exquisite poison in the air.  I had a passion for sensations....
Well, one evening about seven o'clock, I determined to go out in search
of some adventure.  I felt that this grey monstrous London of ours,
with its myriads of people, its sordid sinners, and its splendid sins,
as you once phrased it, must have something in store for me.  I fancied
a thousand things.  The mere danger gave me a sense of delight.  I
remembered what you had said to me on that wonderful evening when we
first dined together, about the search for beauty being the real secret
of life.  I don't know what I expected, but I went out and wandered
eastward, soon losing my way in a labyrinth of grimy streets and black
grassless squares.  About half-past eight I passed by an absurd little
theatre, with great flaring gas-jets and gaudy play-bills.  A hideous
Jew, in the most amazing waistcoat I ever beheld in my life, was
standing at the entrance, smoking a vile cigar.  He had greasy
ringlets, and an enormous diamond blazed in the centre of a soiled
shirt. 'Have a box, my Lord?' he said, when he saw me, and he took off
his hat with an air of gorgeous servility.  There was something about
him, Harry, that amused me.  He was such a monster.  You will laugh at
me, I know, but I really went in and paid a whole guinea for the
stage-box. To the present day I can't make out why I did so; and yet if
I hadn't--my dear Harry, if I hadn't--I should have missed the greatest
romance of my life.  I see you are laughing.  It is horrid of you!"

"I am not laughing, Dorian; at least I am not laughing at you.  But you
should not say the greatest romance of your life.  You should say the
first romance of your life.  You will always be loved, and you will
always be in love with love.  A _grande passion_ is the privilege of
people who have nothing to do.  That is the one use of the idle classes
of a country.  Don't be afraid.  There are exquisite things in store
for you.  This is merely the beginning."

"Do you think my nature so shallow?" cried Dorian Gray angrily.

"No; I think your nature so deep."

"How do you mean?"

"My dear boy, the people who love only once in their lives are really
the shallow people.  What they call their loyalty, and their fidelity,
I call either the lethargy of custom or their lack of imagination.
Faithfulness is to the emotional life what consistency is to the life
of the intellect--simply a confession of failure.  Faithfulness!  I
must analyse it some day.  The passion for property is in it.  There
are many things that we would throw away if we were not afraid that
others might pick them up.  But I don't want to interrupt you.  Go on
with your story."

"Well, I found myself seated in a horrid little private box, with a
vulgar drop-scene staring me in the face.  I looked out from behind the
curtain and surveyed the house.  It was a tawdry affair, all Cupids and
cornucopias, like a third-rate wedding-cake. The gallery and pit were
fairly full, but the two rows of dingy stalls were quite empty, and
there was hardly a person in what I suppose they called the
dress-circle.  Women went about with oranges and ginger-beer, and there
was a terrible consumption of nuts going on."

"It must have been just like the palmy days of the British drama."

"Just like, I should fancy, and very depressing.  I began to wonder
what on earth I should do when I caught sight of the play-bill.  What
do you think the play was, Harry?"

"I should think 'The Idiot Boy', or 'Dumb but Innocent'.  Our fathers
used to like that sort of piece, I believe.  The longer I live, Dorian,
the more keenly I feel that whatever was good enough for our fathers is
not good enough for us.  In art, as in politics, _les grandperes ont
toujours tort_."

"This play was good enough for us, Harry.  It was Romeo and Juliet.  I
must admit that I was rather annoyed at the idea of seeing Shakespeare
done in such a wretched hole of a place.  Still, I felt interested, in
a sort of way.  At any rate, I determined to wait for the first act.
There was a dreadful orchestra, presided over by a young Hebrew who sat
at a cracked piano, that nearly drove me away, but at last the
drop-scene was drawn up and the play began.  Romeo was a stout elderly
gentleman, with corked eyebrows, a husky tragedy voice, and a figure
like a beer-barrel. Mercutio was almost as bad.  He was played by the
low-comedian, who had introduced gags of his own and was on most
friendly terms with the pit.  They were both as grotesque as the
scenery, and that looked as if it had come out of a country-booth. But
Juliet!  Harry, imagine a girl, hardly seventeen years of age, with a
little, flowerlike face, a small Greek head with plaited coils of
dark-brown hair, eyes that were violet wells of passion, lips that were
like the petals of a rose.  She was the loveliest thing I had ever seen
in my life.  You said to me once that pathos left you unmoved, but that
beauty, mere beauty, could fill your eyes with tears.  I tell you,
Harry, I could hardly see this girl for the mist of tears that came
across me.  And her voice--I never heard such a voice.  It was very low
at first, with deep mellow notes that seemed to fall singly upon one's
ear.  Then it became a little louder, and sounded like a flute or a
distant hautboy.  In the garden-scene it had all the tremulous ecstasy
that one hears just before dawn when nightingales are singing.  There
were moments, later on, when it had the wild passion of violins.  You
know how a voice can stir one.  Your voice and the voice of Sibyl Vane
are two things that I shall never forget.  When I close my eyes, I hear
them, and each of them says something different.  I don't know which to
follow.  Why should I not love her?  Harry, I do love her.  She is
everything to me in life.  Night after night I go to see her play.  One
evening she is Rosalind, and the next evening she is Imogen.  I have
seen her die in the gloom of an Italian tomb, sucking the poison from
her lover's lips.  I have watched her wandering through the forest of
Arden, disguised as a pretty boy in hose and doublet and dainty cap.
She has been mad, and has come into the presence of a guilty king, and
given him rue to wear and bitter herbs to taste of.  She has been
innocent, and the black hands of jealousy have crushed her reedlike
throat.  I have seen her in every age and in every costume.  Ordinary
women never appeal to one's imagination.  They are limited to their
century.  No glamour ever transfigures them.  One knows their minds as
easily as one knows their bonnets.  One can always find them.  There is
no mystery in any of them.  They ride in the park in the morning and
chatter at tea-parties in the afternoon.  They have their stereotyped
smile and their fashionable manner.  They are quite obvious.  But an
actress!  How different an actress is!  Harry! why didn't you tell me
that the only thing worth loving is an actress?"

"Because I have loved so many of them, Dorian."

"Oh, yes, horrid people with dyed hair and painted faces."

"Don't run down dyed hair and painted faces.  There is an extraordinary
charm in them, sometimes," said Lord Henry.

"I wish now I had not told you about Sibyl Vane."

"You could not have helped telling me, Dorian.  All through your life
you will tell me everything you do."

"Yes, Harry, I believe that is true.  I cannot help telling you things.
You have a curious influence over me.  If I ever did a crime, I would
come and confess it to you.  You would understand me."

"People like you--the wilful sunbeams of life--don't commit crimes,
Dorian.  But I am much obliged for the compliment, all the same.  And
now tell me--reach me the matches, like a good boy--thanks--what are
your actual relations with Sibyl Vane?"

Dorian Gray leaped to his feet, with flushed cheeks and burning eyes.
"Harry!  Sibyl Vane is sacred!"

"It is only the sacred things that are worth touching, Dorian," said
Lord Henry, with a strange touch of pathos in his voice.  "But why
should you be annoyed?  I suppose she will belong to you some day.
When one is in love, one always begins by deceiving one's self, and one
always ends by deceiving others.  That is what the world calls a
romance.  You know her, at any rate, I suppose?"

"Of course I know her.  On the first night I was at the theatre, the
horrid old Jew came round to the box after the performance was over and
offered to take me behind the scenes and introduce me to her.  I was
furious with him, and told him that Juliet had been dead for hundreds
of years and that her body was lying in a marble tomb in Verona.  I
think, from his blank look of amazement, that he was under the
impression that I had taken too much champagne, or something."

"I am not surprised."

"Then he asked me if I wrote for any of the newspapers.  I told him I
never even read them.  He seemed terribly disappointed at that, and
confided to me that all the dramatic critics were in a conspiracy
against him, and that they were every one of them to be bought."

"I should not wonder if he was quite right there.  But, on the other
hand, judging from their appearance, most of them cannot be at all
expensive."

"Well, he seemed to think they were beyond his means," laughed Dorian.
"By this time, however, the lights were being put out in the theatre,
and I had to go.  He wanted me to try some cigars that he strongly
recommended.  I declined.  The next night, of course, I arrived at the
place again.  When he saw me, he made me a low bow and assured me that
I was a munificent patron of art.  He was a most offensive brute,
though he had an extraordinary passion for Shakespeare.  He told me
once, with an air of pride, that his five bankruptcies were entirely
due to 'The Bard,' as he insisted on calling him.  He seemed to think
it a distinction."

"It was a distinction, my dear Dorian--a great distinction.  Most
people become bankrupt through having invested too heavily in the prose
of life.  To have ruined one's self over poetry is an honour.  But when
did you first speak to Miss Sibyl Vane?"

"The third night.  She had been playing Rosalind.  I could not help
going round.  I had thrown her some flowers, and she had looked at
me--at least I fancied that she had.  The old Jew was persistent.  He
seemed determined to take me behind, so I consented.  It was curious my
not wanting to know her, wasn't it?"

"No; I don't think so."

"My dear Harry, why?"

"I will tell you some other time.  Now I want to know about the girl."

"Sibyl?  Oh, she was so shy and so gentle.  There is something of a
child about her.  Her eyes opened wide in exquisite wonder when I told
her what I thought of her performance, and she seemed quite unconscious
of her power.  I think we were both rather nervous.  The old Jew stood
grinning at the doorway of the dusty greenroom, making elaborate
speeches about us both, while we stood looking at each other like
children.  He would insist on calling me 'My Lord,' so I had to assure
Sibyl that I was not anything of the kind.  She said quite simply to
me, 'You look more like a prince.  I must call you Prince Charming.'"

"Upon my word, Dorian, Miss Sibyl knows how to pay compliments."

"You don't understand her, Harry.  She regarded me merely as a person
in a play.  She knows nothing of life.  She lives with her mother, a
faded tired woman who played Lady Capulet in a sort of magenta
dressing-wrapper on the first night, and looks as if she had seen
better days."

"I know that look.  It depresses me," murmured Lord Henry, examining
his rings.

"The Jew wanted to tell me her history, but I said it did not interest
me."

"You were quite right.  There is always something infinitely mean about
other people's tragedies."

"Sibyl is the only thing I care about.  What is it to me where she came
from?  From her little head to her little feet, she is absolutely and
entirely divine.  Every night of my life I go to see her act, and every
night she is more marvellous."

"That is the reason, I suppose, that you never dine with me now.  I
thought you must have some curious romance on hand.  You have; but it
is not quite what I expected."

"My dear Harry, we either lunch or sup together every day, and I have
been to the opera with you several times," said Dorian, opening his
blue eyes in wonder.

"You always come dreadfully late."

"Well, I can't help going to see Sibyl play," he cried, "even if it is
only for a single act.  I get hungry for her presence; and when I think
of the wonderful soul that is hidden away in that little ivory body, I
am filled with awe."

"You can dine with me to-night, Dorian, can't you?"

He shook his head.  "To-night she is Imogen," he answered, "and
to-morrow night she will be Juliet."

"When is she Sibyl Vane?"

"Never."

"I congratulate you."

"How horrid you are!  She is all the great heroines of the world in
one.  She is more than an individual.  You laugh, but I tell you she
has genius.  I love her, and I must make her love me.  You, who know
all the secrets of life, tell me how to charm Sibyl Vane to love me!  I
want to make Romeo jealous.  I want the dead lovers of the world to
hear our laughter and grow sad.  I want a breath of our passion to stir
their dust into consciousness, to wake their ashes into pain.  My God,
Harry, how I worship her!"  He was walking up and down the room as he
spoke.  Hectic spots of red burned on his cheeks.  He was terribly
excited.

Lord Henry watched him with a subtle sense of pleasure.  How different
he was now from the shy frightened boy he had met in Basil Hallward's
studio!  His nature had developed like a flower, had borne blossoms of
scarlet flame.  Out of its secret hiding-place had crept his soul, and
desire had come to meet it on the way.

"And what do you propose to do?" said Lord Henry at last.

"I want you and Basil to come with me some night and see her act.  I
have not the slightest fear of the result.  You are certain to
acknowledge her genius.  Then we must get her out of the Jew's hands.
She is bound to him for three years--at least for two years and eight
months--from the present time.  I shall have to pay him something, of
course.  When all that is settled, I shall take a West End theatre and
bring her out properly.  She will make the world as mad as she has made
me."

"That would be impossible, my dear boy."

"Yes, she will.  She has not merely art, consummate art-instinct, in
her, but she has personality also; and you have often told me that it
is personalities, not principles, that move the age."

"Well, what night shall we go?"

"Let me see.  To-day is Tuesday.  Let us fix to-morrow. She plays
Juliet to-morrow."

"All right.  The Bristol at eight o'clock; and I will get Basil."

"Not eight, Harry, please.  Half-past six.  We must be there before the
curtain rises.  You must see her in the first act, where she meets
Romeo."

"Half-past six!  What an hour!  It will be like having a meat-tea, or
reading an English novel.  It must be seven.  No gentleman dines before
seven.  Shall you see Basil between this and then?  Or shall I write to
him?"

"Dear Basil!  I have not laid eyes on him for a week.  It is rather
horrid of me, as he has sent me my portrait in the most wonderful
frame, specially designed by himself, and, though I am a little jealous
of the picture for being a whole month younger than I am, I must admit
that I delight in it.  Perhaps you had better write to him.  I don't
want to see him alone.  He says things that annoy me.  He gives me good
advice."

Lord Henry smiled.  "People are very fond of giving away what they need
most themselves.  It is what I call the depth of generosity."

"Oh, Basil is the best of fellows, but he seems to me to be just a bit
of a Philistine.  Since I have known you, Harry, I have discovered
that."

"Basil, my dear boy, puts everything that is charming in him into his
work.  The consequence is that he has nothing left for life but his
prejudices, his principles, and his common sense.  The only artists I
have ever known who are personally delightful are bad artists.  Good
artists exist simply in what they make, and consequently are perfectly
uninteresting in what they are.  A great poet, a really great poet, is
the most unpoetical of all creatures.  But inferior poets are
absolutely fascinating.  The worse their rhymes are, the more
picturesque they look.  The mere fact of having published a book of
second-rate sonnets makes a man quite irresistible.  He lives the
poetry that he cannot write.  The others write the poetry that they
dare not realize."

"I wonder is that really so, Harry?" said Dorian Gray, putting some
perfume on his handkerchief out of a large, gold-topped bottle that
stood on the table.  "It must be, if you say it.  And now I am off.
Imogen is waiting for me.  Don't forget about to-morrow. Good-bye."

As he left the room, Lord Henry's heavy eyelids drooped, and he began
to think.  Certainly few people had ever interested him so much as
Dorian Gray, and yet the lad's mad adoration of some one else caused
him not the slightest pang of annoyance or jealousy.  He was pleased by
it.  It made him a more interesting study.  He had been always
enthralled by the methods of natural science, but the ordinary
subject-matter of that science had seemed to him trivial and of no
import.  And so he had begun by vivisecting himself, as he had ended by
vivisecting others.  Human life--that appeared to him the one thing
worth investigating.  Compared to it there was nothing else of any
value.  It was true that as one watched life in its curious crucible of
pain and pleasure, one could not wear over one's face a mask of glass,
nor keep the sulphurous fumes from troubling the brain and making the
imagination turbid with monstrous fancies and misshapen dreams.  There
were poisons so subtle that to know their properties one had to sicken
of them.  There were maladies so strange that one had to pass through
them if one sought to understand their nature.  And, yet, what a great
reward one received!  How wonderful the whole world became to one!  To
note the curious hard logic of passion, and the emotional coloured life
of the intellect--to observe where they met, and where they separated,
at what point they were in unison, and at what point they were at
discord--there was a delight in that!  What matter what the cost was?
One could never pay too high a price for any sensation.

He was conscious--and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure into his
brown agate eyes--that it was through certain words of his, musical
words said with musical utterance, that Dorian Gray's soul had turned
to this white girl and bowed in worship before her.  To a large extent
the lad was his own creation.  He had made him premature.  That was
something.  Ordinary people waited till life disclosed to them its
secrets, but to the few, to the elect, the mysteries of life were
revealed before the veil was drawn away.  Sometimes this was the effect
of art, and chiefly of the art of literature, which dealt immediately
with the passions and the intellect.  But now and then a complex
personality took the place and assumed the office of art, was indeed,
in its way, a real work of art, life having its elaborate masterpieces,
just as poetry has, or sculpture, or painting.

Yes, the lad was premature.  He was gathering his harvest while it was
yet spring.  The pulse and passion of youth were in him, but he was
becoming self-conscious. It was delightful to watch him.  With his
beautiful face, and his beautiful soul, he was a thing to wonder at.
It was no matter how it all ended, or was destined to end.  He was like
one of those gracious figures in a pageant or a play, whose joys seem
to be remote from one, but whose sorrows stir one's sense of beauty,
and whose wounds are like red roses.

Soul and body, body and soul--how mysterious they were!  There was
animalism in the soul, and the body had its moments of spirituality.
The senses could refine, and the intellect could degrade.  Who could
say where the fleshly impulse ceased, or the psychical impulse began?
How shallow were the arbitrary definitions of ordinary psychologists!
And yet how difficult to decide between the claims of the various
schools!  Was the soul a shadow seated in the house of sin?  Or was the
body really in the soul, as Giordano Bruno thought?  The separation of
spirit from matter was a mystery, and the union of spirit with matter
was a mystery also.

He began to wonder whether we could ever make psychology so absolute a
science that each little spring of life would be revealed to us.  As it
was, we always misunderstood ourselves and rarely understood others.
Experience was of no ethical value.  It was merely the name men gave to
their mistakes.  Moralists had, as a rule, regarded it as a mode of
warning, had claimed for it a certain ethical efficacy in the formation
of character, had praised it as something that taught us what to follow
and showed us what to avoid.  But there was no motive power in
experience.  It was as little of an active cause as conscience itself.
All that it really demonstrated was that our future would be the same
as our past, and that the sin we had done once, and with loathing, we
would do many times, and with joy.

It was clear to him that the experimental method was the only method by
which one could arrive at any scientific analysis of the passions; and
certainly Dorian Gray was a subject made to his hand, and seemed to
promise rich and fruitful results.  His sudden mad love for Sibyl Vane
was a psychological phenomenon of no small interest.  There was no
doubt that curiosity had much to do with it, curiosity and the desire
for new experiences, yet it was not a simple, but rather a very complex
passion.  What there was in it of the purely sensuous instinct of
boyhood had been transformed by the workings of the imagination,
changed into something that seemed to the lad himself to be remote from
sense, and was for that very reason all the more dangerous.  It was the
passions about whose origin we deceived ourselves that tyrannized most
strongly over us.  Our weakest motives were those of whose nature we
were conscious.  It often happened that when we thought we were
experimenting on others we were really experimenting on ourselves.

While Lord Henry sat dreaming on these things, a knock came to the
door, and his valet entered and reminded him it was time to dress for
dinner.  He got up and looked out into the street.  The sunset had
smitten into scarlet gold the upper windows of the houses opposite.
The panes glowed like plates of heated metal.  The sky above was like a
faded rose.  He thought of his friend's young fiery-coloured life and
wondered how it was all going to end.

When he arrived home, about half-past twelve o'clock, he saw a telegram
lying on the hall table.  He opened it and found it was from Dorian
Gray.  It was to tell him that he was engaged to be married to Sibyl
Vane.



CHAPTER 5

"Mother, Mother, I am so happy!" whispered the girl, burying her face
in the lap of the faded, tired-looking woman who, with back turned to
the shrill intrusive light, was sitting in the one arm-chair that their
dingy sitting-room contained.  "I am so happy!" she repeated, "and you
must be happy, too!"

Mrs. Vane winced and put her thin, bismuth-whitened hands on her
daughter's head.  "Happy!" she echoed, "I am only happy, Sibyl, when I
see you act.  You must not think of anything but your acting.  Mr.
Isaacs has been very good to us, and we owe him money."

The girl looked up and pouted.  "Money, Mother?" she cried, "what does
money matter?  Love is more than money."

"Mr. Isaacs has advanced us fifty pounds to pay off our debts and to
get a proper outfit for James.  You must not forget that, Sibyl.  Fifty
pounds is a very large sum.  Mr. Isaacs has been most considerate."

"He is not a gentleman, Mother, and I hate the way he talks to me,"
said the girl, rising to her feet and going over to the window.

"I don't know how we could manage without him," answered the elder
woman querulously.

Sibyl Vane tossed her head and laughed.  "We don't want him any more,
Mother.  Prince Charming rules life for us now." Then she paused.  A
rose shook in her blood and shadowed her cheeks.  Quick breath parted
the petals of her lips.  They trembled.  Some southern wind of passion
swept over her and stirred the dainty folds of her dress.  "I love
him," she said simply.

"Foolish child! foolish child!" was the parrot-phrase flung in answer.
The waving of crooked, false-jewelled fingers gave grotesqueness to the
words.

The girl laughed again.  The joy of a caged bird was in her voice.  Her
eyes caught the melody and echoed it in radiance, then closed for a
moment, as though to hide their secret.  When they opened, the mist of
a dream had passed across them.

Thin-lipped wisdom spoke at her from the worn chair, hinted at
prudence, quoted from that book of cowardice whose author apes the name
of common sense.  She did not listen.  She was free in her prison of
passion.  Her prince, Prince Charming, was with her.  She had called on
memory to remake him.  She had sent her soul to search for him, and it
had brought him back.  His kiss burned again upon her mouth.  Her
eyelids were warm with his breath.

Then wisdom altered its method and spoke of espial and discovery.  This
young man might be rich.  If so, marriage should be thought of.
Against the shell of her ear broke the waves of worldly cunning.  The
arrows of craft shot by her.  She saw the thin lips moving, and smiled.

Suddenly she felt the need to speak.  The wordy silence troubled her.
"Mother, Mother," she cried, "why does he love me so much?  I know why
I love him.  I love him because he is like what love himself should be.
But what does he see in me?  I am not worthy of him.  And yet--why, I
cannot tell--though I feel so much beneath him, I don't feel humble.  I
feel proud, terribly proud.  Mother, did you love my father as I love
Prince Charming?"

The elder woman grew pale beneath the coarse powder that daubed her
cheeks, and her dry lips twitched with a spasm of pain.  Sybil rushed
to her, flung her arms round her neck, and kissed her.  "Forgive me,
Mother.  I know it pains you to talk about our father.  But it only
pains you because you loved him so much.  Don't look so sad.  I am as
happy to-day as you were twenty years ago.  Ah! let me be happy for
ever!"

"My child, you are far too young to think of falling in love.  Besides,
what do you know of this young man?  You don't even know his name.  The
whole thing is most inconvenient, and really, when James is going away
to Australia, and I have so much to think of, I must say that you
should have shown more consideration.  However, as I said before, if he
is rich ..."

"Ah!  Mother, Mother, let me be happy!"

Mrs. Vane glanced at her, and with one of those false theatrical
gestures that so often become a mode of second nature to a
stage-player, clasped her in her arms.  At this moment, the door opened
and a young lad with rough brown hair came into the room.  He was
thick-set of figure, and his hands and feet were large and somewhat
clumsy in movement.  He was not so finely bred as his sister.  One
would hardly have guessed the close relationship that existed between
them.  Mrs. Vane fixed her eyes on him and intensified her smile.  She
mentally elevated her son to the dignity of an audience.  She felt sure
that the _tableau_ was interesting.

"You might keep some of your kisses for me, Sibyl, I think," said the
lad with a good-natured grumble.

"Ah! but you don't like being kissed, Jim," she cried.  "You are a
dreadful old bear."  And she ran across the room and hugged him.

James Vane looked into his sister's face with tenderness.  "I want you
to come out with me for a walk, Sibyl.  I don't suppose I shall ever
see this horrid London again.  I am sure I don't want to."

"My son, don't say such dreadful things," murmured Mrs. Vane, taking up
a tawdry theatrical dress, with a sigh, and beginning to patch it.  She
felt a little disappointed that he had not joined the group.  It would
have increased the theatrical picturesqueness of the situation.

"Why not, Mother?  I mean it."

"You pain me, my son.  I trust you will return from Australia in a
position of affluence.  I believe there is no society of any kind in
the Colonies--nothing that I would call society--so when you have made
your fortune, you must come back and assert yourself in London."

"Society!" muttered the lad.  "I don't want to know anything about
that.  I should like to make some money to take you and Sibyl off the
stage.  I hate it."

"Oh, Jim!" said Sibyl, laughing, "how unkind of you!  But are you
really going for a walk with me?  That will be nice!  I was afraid you
were going to say good-bye to some of your friends--to Tom Hardy, who
gave you that hideous pipe, or Ned Langton, who makes fun of you for
smoking it.  It is very sweet of you to let me have your last
afternoon.  Where shall we go?  Let us go to the park."

"I am too shabby," he answered, frowning.  "Only swell people go to the
park."

"Nonsense, Jim," she whispered, stroking the sleeve of his coat.

He hesitated for a moment.  "Very well," he said at last, "but don't be
too long dressing."  She danced out of the door.  One could hear her
singing as she ran upstairs.  Her little feet pattered overhead.

He walked up and down the room two or three times.  Then he turned to
the still figure in the chair.  "Mother, are my things ready?" he asked.

"Quite ready, James," she answered, keeping her eyes on her work.  For
some months past she had felt ill at ease when she was alone with this
rough stern son of hers.  Her shallow secret nature was troubled when
their eyes met.  She used to wonder if he suspected anything.  The
silence, for he made no other observation, became intolerable to her.
She began to complain.  Women defend themselves by attacking, just as
they attack by sudden and strange surrenders.  "I hope you will be
contented, James, with your sea-faring life," she said.  "You must
remember that it is your own choice.  You might have entered a
solicitor's office.  Solicitors are a very respectable class, and in
the country often dine with the best families."

"I hate offices, and I hate clerks," he replied.  "But you are quite
right.  I have chosen my own life.  All I say is, watch over Sibyl.
Don't let her come to any harm.  Mother, you must watch over her."

"James, you really talk very strangely.  Of course I watch over Sibyl."

"I hear a gentleman comes every night to the theatre and goes behind to
talk to her.  Is that right?  What about that?"

"You are speaking about things you don't understand, James.  In the
profession we are accustomed to receive a great deal of most gratifying
attention.  I myself used to receive many bouquets at one time.  That
was when acting was really understood.  As for Sibyl, I do not know at
present whether her attachment is serious or not.  But there is no
doubt that the young man in question is a perfect gentleman.  He is
always most polite to me.  Besides, he has the appearance of being
rich, and the flowers he sends are lovely."

"You don't know his name, though," said the lad harshly.

"No," answered his mother with a placid expression in her face.  "He
has not yet revealed his real name.  I think it is quite romantic of
him.  He is probably a member of the aristocracy."

James Vane bit his lip.  "Watch over Sibyl, Mother," he cried, "watch
over her."

"My son, you distress me very much.  Sibyl is always under my special
care.  Of course, if this gentleman is wealthy, there is no reason why
she should not contract an alliance with him.  I trust he is one of the
aristocracy.  He has all the appearance of it, I must say.  It might be
a most brilliant marriage for Sibyl.  They would make a charming
couple.  His good looks are really quite remarkable; everybody notices
them."

The lad muttered something to himself and drummed on the window-pane
with his coarse fingers.  He had just turned round to say something
when the door opened and Sibyl ran in.

"How serious you both are!" she cried.  "What is the matter?"

"Nothing," he answered.  "I suppose one must be serious sometimes.
Good-bye, Mother; I will have my dinner at five o'clock. Everything is
packed, except my shirts, so you need not trouble."

"Good-bye, my son," she answered with a bow of strained stateliness.

She was extremely annoyed at the tone he had adopted with her, and
there was something in his look that had made her feel afraid.

"Kiss me, Mother," said the girl.  Her flowerlike lips touched the
withered cheek and warmed its frost.

"My child! my child!" cried Mrs. Vane, looking up to the ceiling in
search of an imaginary gallery.

"Come, Sibyl," said her brother impatiently.  He hated his mother's
affectations.

They went out into the flickering, wind-blown sunlight and strolled
down the dreary Euston Road.  The passersby glanced in wonder at the
sullen heavy youth who, in coarse, ill-fitting clothes, was in the
company of such a graceful, refined-looking girl.  He was like a common
gardener walking with a rose.

Jim frowned from time to time when he caught the inquisitive glance of
some stranger.  He had that dislike of being stared at, which comes on
geniuses late in life and never leaves the commonplace.  Sibyl,
however, was quite unconscious of the effect she was producing.  Her
love was trembling in laughter on her lips.  She was thinking of Prince
Charming, and, that she might think of him all the more, she did not
talk of him, but prattled on about the ship in which Jim was going to
sail, about the gold he was certain to find, about the wonderful
heiress whose life he was to save from the wicked, red-shirted
bushrangers.  For he was not to remain a sailor, or a supercargo, or
whatever he was going to be.  Oh, no!  A sailor's existence was
dreadful.  Fancy being cooped up in a horrid ship, with the hoarse,
hump-backed waves trying to get in, and a black wind blowing the masts
down and tearing the sails into long screaming ribands!  He was to
leave the vessel at Melbourne, bid a polite good-bye to the captain,
and go off at once to the gold-fields. Before a week was over he was to
come across a large nugget of pure gold, the largest nugget that had
ever been discovered, and bring it down to the coast in a waggon
guarded by six mounted policemen.  The bushrangers were to attack them
three times, and be defeated with immense slaughter.  Or, no.  He was
not to go to the gold-fields at all.  They were horrid places, where
men got intoxicated, and shot each other in bar-rooms, and used bad
language.  He was to be a nice sheep-farmer, and one evening, as he was
riding home, he was to see the beautiful heiress being carried off by a
robber on a black horse, and give chase, and rescue her.  Of course,
she would fall in love with him, and he with her, and they would get
married, and come home, and live in an immense house in London.  Yes,
there were delightful things in store for him.  But he must be very
good, and not lose his temper, or spend his money foolishly.  She was
only a year older than he was, but she knew so much more of life.  He
must be sure, also, to write to her by every mail, and to say his
prayers each night before he went to sleep.  God was very good, and
would watch over him.  She would pray for him, too, and in a few years
he would come back quite rich and happy.

The lad listened sulkily to her and made no answer.  He was heart-sick
at leaving home.

Yet it was not this alone that made him gloomy and morose.
Inexperienced though he was, he had still a strong sense of the danger
of Sibyl's position.  This young dandy who was making love to her could
mean her no good.  He was a gentleman, and he hated him for that, hated
him through some curious race-instinct for which he could not account,
and which for that reason was all the more dominant within him.  He was
conscious also of the shallowness and vanity of his mother's nature,
and in that saw infinite peril for Sibyl and Sibyl's happiness.
Children begin by loving their parents; as they grow older they judge
them; sometimes they forgive them.

His mother!  He had something on his mind to ask of her, something that
he had brooded on for many months of silence.  A chance phrase that he
had heard at the theatre, a whispered sneer that had reached his ears
one night as he waited at the stage-door, had set loose a train of
horrible thoughts.  He remembered it as if it had been the lash of a
hunting-crop across his face.  His brows knit together into a wedge-like
furrow, and with a twitch of pain he bit his underlip.

"You are not listening to a word I am saying, Jim," cried Sibyl, "and I
am making the most delightful plans for your future.  Do say something."

"What do you want me to say?"

"Oh! that you will be a good boy and not forget us," she answered,
smiling at him.

He shrugged his shoulders.  "You are more likely to forget me than I am
to forget you, Sibyl."

She flushed.  "What do you mean, Jim?" she asked.

"You have a new friend, I hear.  Who is he?  Why have you not told me
about him?  He means you no good."

"Stop, Jim!" she exclaimed.  "You must not say anything against him.  I
love him."

"Why, you don't even know his name," answered the lad.  "Who is he?  I
have a right to know."

"He is called Prince Charming.  Don't you like the name.  Oh! you silly
boy! you should never forget it.  If you only saw him, you would think
him the most wonderful person in the world.  Some day you will meet
him--when you come back from Australia.  You will like him so much.
Everybody likes him, and I ... love him.  I wish you could come to the
theatre to-night. He is going to be there, and I am to play Juliet.
Oh! how I shall play it!  Fancy, Jim, to be in love and play Juliet!
To have him sitting there!  To play for his delight!  I am afraid I may
frighten the company, frighten or enthrall them.  To be in love is to
surpass one's self.  Poor dreadful Mr. Isaacs will be shouting 'genius'
to his loafers at the bar.  He has preached me as a dogma; to-night he
will announce me as a revelation.  I feel it.  And it is all his, his
only, Prince Charming, my wonderful lover, my god of graces.  But I am
poor beside him.  Poor?  What does that matter?  When poverty creeps in
at the door, love flies in through the window.  Our proverbs want
rewriting.  They were made in winter, and it is summer now; spring-time
for me, I think, a very dance of blossoms in blue skies."

"He is a gentleman," said the lad sullenly.

"A prince!" she cried musically.  "What more do you want?"

"He wants to enslave you."

"I shudder at the thought of being free."

"I want you to beware of him."

"To see him is to worship him; to know him is to trust him."

"Sibyl, you are mad about him."

She laughed and took his arm.  "You dear old Jim, you talk as if you
were a hundred.  Some day you will be in love yourself.  Then you will
know what it is.  Don't look so sulky.  Surely you should be glad to
think that, though you are going away, you leave me happier than I have
ever been before.  Life has been hard for us both, terribly hard and
difficult.  But it will be different now.  You are going to a new
world, and I have found one.  Here are two chairs; let us sit down and
see the smart people go by."

They took their seats amidst a crowd of watchers.  The tulip-beds
across the road flamed like throbbing rings of fire.  A white
dust--tremulous cloud of orris-root it seemed--hung in the panting air.
The brightly coloured parasols danced and dipped like monstrous
butterflies.

She made her brother talk of himself, his hopes, his prospects.  He
spoke slowly and with effort.  They passed words to each other as
players at a game pass counters.  Sibyl felt oppressed.  She could not
communicate her joy.  A faint smile curving that sullen mouth was all
the echo she could win.  After some time she became silent.  Suddenly
she caught a glimpse of golden hair and laughing lips, and in an open
carriage with two ladies Dorian Gray drove past.

She started to her feet.  "There he is!" she cried.

"Who?" said Jim Vane.

"Prince Charming," she answered, looking after the victoria.

He jumped up and seized her roughly by the arm.  "Show him to me.
Which is he?  Point him out.  I must see him!" he exclaimed; but at
that moment the Duke of Berwick's four-in-hand came between, and when
it had left the space clear, the carriage had swept out of the park.

"He is gone," murmured Sibyl sadly.  "I wish you had seen him."

"I wish I had, for as sure as there is a God in heaven, if he ever does
you any wrong, I shall kill him."

She looked at him in horror.  He repeated his words.  They cut the air
like a dagger.  The people round began to gape.  A lady standing close
to her tittered.

"Come away, Jim; come away," she whispered.  He followed her doggedly
as she passed through the crowd.  He felt glad at what he had said.

When they reached the Achilles Statue, she turned round.  There was
pity in her eyes that became laughter on her lips.  She shook her head
at him.  "You are foolish, Jim, utterly foolish; a bad-tempered boy,
that is all.  How can you say such horrible things?  You don't know
what you are talking about.  You are simply jealous and unkind.  Ah!  I
wish you would fall in love.  Love makes people good, and what you said
was wicked."

"I am sixteen," he answered, "and I know what I am about.  Mother is no
help to you.  She doesn't understand how to look after you.  I wish now
that I was not going to Australia at all.  I have a great mind to chuck
the whole thing up.  I would, if my articles hadn't been signed."

"Oh, don't be so serious, Jim.  You are like one of the heroes of those
silly melodramas Mother used to be so fond of acting in.  I am not
going to quarrel with you.  I have seen him, and oh! to see him is
perfect happiness.  We won't quarrel.  I know you would never harm any
one I love, would you?"

"Not as long as you love him, I suppose," was the sullen answer.

"I shall love him for ever!" she cried.

"And he?"

"For ever, too!"

"He had better."

She shrank from him.  Then she laughed and put her hand on his arm.  He
was merely a boy.

At the Marble Arch they hailed an omnibus, which left them close to
their shabby home in the Euston Road.  It was after five o'clock, and
Sibyl had to lie down for a couple of hours before acting.  Jim
insisted that she should do so.  He said that he would sooner part with
her when their mother was not present.  She would be sure to make a
scene, and he detested scenes of every kind.

In Sybil's own room they parted.  There was jealousy in the lad's
heart, and a fierce murderous hatred of the stranger who, as it seemed
to him, had come between them.  Yet, when her arms were flung round his
neck, and her fingers strayed through his hair, he softened and kissed
her with real affection.  There were tears in his eyes as he went
downstairs.

His mother was waiting for him below.  She grumbled at his
unpunctuality, as he entered.  He made no answer, but sat down to his
meagre meal.  The flies buzzed round the table and crawled over the
stained cloth.  Through the rumble of omnibuses, and the clatter of
street-cabs, he could hear the droning voice devouring each minute that
was left to him.

After some time, he thrust away his plate and put his head in his
hands.  He felt that he had a right to know.  It should have been told
to him before, if it was as he suspected.  Leaden with fear, his mother
watched him.  Words dropped mechanically from her lips.  A tattered
lace handkerchief twitched in her fingers.  When the clock struck six,
he got up and went to the door.  Then he turned back and looked at her.
Their eyes met.  In hers he saw a wild appeal for mercy.  It enraged
him.

"Mother, I have something to ask you," he said.  Her eyes wandered
vaguely about the room.  She made no answer.  "Tell me the truth.  I
have a right to know.  Were you married to my father?"

She heaved a deep sigh.  It was a sigh of relief.  The terrible moment,
the moment that night and day, for weeks and months, she had dreaded,
had come at last, and yet she felt no terror.  Indeed, in some measure
it was a disappointment to her.  The vulgar directness of the question
called for a direct answer.  The situation had not been gradually led
up to.  It was crude.  It reminded her of a bad rehearsal.

"No," she answered, wondering at the harsh simplicity of life.

"My father was a scoundrel then!" cried the lad, clenching his fists.

She shook her head.  "I knew he was not free.  We loved each other very
much.  If he had lived, he would have made provision for us.  Don't
speak against him, my son.  He was your father, and a gentleman.
Indeed, he was highly connected."

An oath broke from his lips.  "I don't care for myself," he exclaimed,
"but don't let Sibyl.... It is a gentleman, isn't it, who is in love
with her, or says he is?  Highly connected, too, I suppose."

For a moment a hideous sense of humiliation came over the woman.  Her
head drooped.  She wiped her eyes with shaking hands.  "Sibyl has a
mother," she murmured; "I had none."

The lad was touched.  He went towards her, and stooping down, he kissed
her.  "I am sorry if I have pained you by asking about my father," he
said, "but I could not help it.  I must go now.  Good-bye. Don't forget
that you will have only one child now to look after, and believe me
that if this man wrongs my sister, I will find out who he is, track him
down, and kill him like a dog.  I swear it."

The exaggerated folly of the threat, the passionate gesture that
accompanied it, the mad melodramatic words, made life seem more vivid
to her.  She was familiar with the atmosphere.  She breathed more
freely, and for the first time for many months she really admired her
son.  She would have liked to have continued the scene on the same
emotional scale, but he cut her short.  Trunks had to be carried down
and mufflers looked for.  The lodging-house drudge bustled in and out.
There was the bargaining with the cabman.  The moment was lost in
vulgar details.  It was with a renewed feeling of disappointment that
she waved the tattered lace handkerchief from the window, as her son
drove away.  She was conscious that a great opportunity had been
wasted.  She consoled herself by telling Sibyl how desolate she felt
her life would be, now that she had only one child to look after.  She
remembered the phrase.  It had pleased her.  Of the threat she said
nothing.  It was vividly and dramatically expressed.  She felt that
they would all laugh at it some day.



CHAPTER 6

"I suppose you have heard the news, Basil?" said Lord Henry that
evening as Hallward was shown into a little private room at the Bristol
where dinner had been laid for three.

"No, Harry," answered the artist, giving his hat and coat to the bowing
waiter.  "What is it?  Nothing about politics, I hope!  They don't
interest me.  There is hardly a single person in the House of Commons
worth painting, though many of them would be the better for a little
whitewashing."

"Dorian Gray is engaged to be married," said Lord Henry, watching him
as he spoke.

Hallward started and then frowned.  "Dorian engaged to be married!" he
cried.  "Impossible!"

"It is perfectly true."

"To whom?"

"To some little actress or other."

"I can't believe it.  Dorian is far too sensible."

"Dorian is far too wise not to do foolish things now and then, my dear
Basil."

"Marriage is hardly a thing that one can do now and then, Harry."

"Except in America," rejoined Lord Henry languidly.  "But I didn't say
he was married.  I said he was engaged to be married.  There is a great
difference.  I have a distinct remembrance of being married, but I have
no recollection at all of being engaged.  I am inclined to think that I
never was engaged."

"But think of Dorian's birth, and position, and wealth.  It would be
absurd for him to marry so much beneath him."

"If you want to make him marry this girl, tell him that, Basil.  He is
sure to do it, then.  Whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid thing, it
is always from the noblest motives."

"I hope the girl is good, Harry.  I don't want to see Dorian tied to
some vile creature, who might degrade his nature and ruin his
intellect."

"Oh, she is better than good--she is beautiful," murmured Lord Henry,
sipping a glass of vermouth and orange-bitters. "Dorian says she is
beautiful, and he is not often wrong about things of that kind.  Your
portrait of him has quickened his appreciation of the personal
appearance of other people.  It has had that excellent effect, amongst
others.  We are to see her to-night, if that boy doesn't forget his
appointment."

"Are you serious?"

"Quite serious, Basil.  I should be miserable if I thought I should
ever be more serious than I am at the present moment."

"But do you approve of it, Harry?" asked the painter, walking up and
down the room and biting his lip.  "You can't approve of it, possibly.
It is some silly infatuation."

"I never approve, or disapprove, of anything now.  It is an absurd
attitude to take towards life.  We are not sent into the world to air
our moral prejudices.  I never take any notice of what common people
say, and I never interfere with what charming people do.  If a
personality fascinates me, whatever mode of expression that personality
selects is absolutely delightful to me.  Dorian Gray falls in love with
a beautiful girl who acts Juliet, and proposes to marry her.  Why not?
If he wedded Messalina, he would be none the less interesting.  You
know I am not a champion of marriage.  The real drawback to marriage is
that it makes one unselfish.  And unselfish people are colourless.
They lack individuality.  Still, there are certain temperaments that
marriage makes more complex.  They retain their egotism, and add to it
many other egos.  They are forced to have more than one life.  They
become more highly organized, and to be highly organized is, I should
fancy, the object of man's existence.  Besides, every experience is of
value, and whatever one may say against marriage, it is certainly an
experience.  I hope that Dorian Gray will make this girl his wife,
passionately adore her for six months, and then suddenly become
fascinated by some one else.  He would be a wonderful study."

"You don't mean a single word of all that, Harry; you know you don't.
If Dorian Gray's life were spoiled, no one would be sorrier than
yourself.  You are much better than you pretend to be."

Lord Henry laughed.  "The reason we all like to think so well of others
is that we are all afraid for ourselves.  The basis of optimism is
sheer terror.  We think that we are generous because we credit our
neighbour with the possession of those virtues that are likely to be a
benefit to us.  We praise the banker that we may overdraw our account,
and find good qualities in the highwayman in the hope that he may spare
our pockets.  I mean everything that I have said.  I have the greatest
contempt for optimism.  As for a spoiled life, no life is spoiled but
one whose growth is arrested.  If you want to mar a nature, you have
merely to reform it.  As for marriage, of course that would be silly,
but there are other and more interesting bonds between men and women.
I will certainly encourage them.  They have the charm of being
fashionable.  But here is Dorian himself.  He will tell you more than I
can."

"My dear Harry, my dear Basil, you must both congratulate me!" said the
lad, throwing off his evening cape with its satin-lined wings and
shaking each of his friends by the hand in turn.  "I have never been so
happy.  Of course, it is sudden--all really delightful things are.  And
yet it seems to me to be the one thing I have been looking for all my
life." He was flushed with excitement and pleasure, and looked
extraordinarily handsome.

"I hope you will always be very happy, Dorian," said Hallward, "but I
don't quite forgive you for not having let me know of your engagement.
You let Harry know."

"And I don't forgive you for being late for dinner," broke in Lord
Henry, putting his hand on the lad's shoulder and smiling as he spoke.
"Come, let us sit down and try what the new _chef_ here is like, and then
you will tell us how it all came about."

"There is really not much to tell," cried Dorian as they took their
seats at the small round table.  "What happened was simply this.  After
I left you yesterday evening, Harry, I dressed, had some dinner at that
little Italian restaurant in Rupert Street you introduced me to, and
went down at eight o'clock to the theatre.  Sibyl was playing Rosalind.
Of course, the scenery was dreadful and the Orlando absurd.  But Sibyl!
You should have seen her!  When she came on in her boy's clothes, she
was perfectly wonderful.  She wore a moss-coloured velvet jerkin with
cinnamon sleeves, slim, brown, cross-gartered hose, a dainty little
green cap with a hawk's feather caught in a jewel, and a hooded cloak
lined with dull red.  She had never seemed to me more exquisite.  She
had all the delicate grace of that Tanagra figurine that you have in
your studio, Basil.  Her hair clustered round her face like dark leaves
round a pale rose.  As for her acting--well, you shall see her
to-night. She is simply a born artist.  I sat in the dingy box
absolutely enthralled.  I forgot that I was in London and in the
nineteenth century.  I was away with my love in a forest that no man
had ever seen.  After the performance was over, I went behind and spoke
to her.  As we were sitting together, suddenly there came into her eyes
a look that I had never seen there before.  My lips moved towards hers.
We kissed each other.  I can't describe to you what I felt at that
moment.  It seemed to me that all my life had been narrowed to one
perfect point of rose-coloured joy.  She trembled all over and shook
like a white narcissus.  Then she flung herself on her knees and kissed
my hands.  I feel that I should not tell you all this, but I can't help
it.  Of course, our engagement is a dead secret.  She has not even told
her own mother.  I don't know what my guardians will say.  Lord Radley
is sure to be furious.  I don't care.  I shall be of age in less than a
year, and then I can do what I like.  I have been right, Basil, haven't
I, to take my love out of poetry and to find my wife in Shakespeare's
plays?  Lips that Shakespeare taught to speak have whispered their
secret in my ear.  I have had the arms of Rosalind around me, and
kissed Juliet on the mouth."

"Yes, Dorian, I suppose you were right," said Hallward slowly.

"Have you seen her to-day?" asked Lord Henry.

Dorian Gray shook his head.  "I left her in the forest of Arden; I
shall find her in an orchard in Verona."

Lord Henry sipped his champagne in a meditative manner.  "At what
particular point did you mention the word marriage, Dorian?  And what
did she say in answer?  Perhaps you forgot all about it."

"My dear Harry, I did not treat it as a business transaction, and I did
not make any formal proposal.  I told her that I loved her, and she
said she was not worthy to be my wife.  Not worthy!  Why, the whole
world is nothing to me compared with her."

"Women are wonderfully practical," murmured Lord Henry, "much more
practical than we are.  In situations of that kind we often forget to
say anything about marriage, and they always remind us."

Hallward laid his hand upon his arm.  "Don't, Harry.  You have annoyed
Dorian.  He is not like other men.  He would never bring misery upon
any one.  His nature is too fine for that."

Lord Henry looked across the table.  "Dorian is never annoyed with me,"
he answered.  "I asked the question for the best reason possible, for
the only reason, indeed, that excuses one for asking any
question--simple curiosity.  I have a theory that it is always the
women who propose to us, and not we who propose to the women.  Except,
of course, in middle-class life.  But then the middle classes are not
modern."

Dorian Gray laughed, and tossed his head.  "You are quite incorrigible,
Harry; but I don't mind.  It is impossible to be angry with you.  When
you see Sibyl Vane, you will feel that the man who could wrong her
would be a beast, a beast without a heart.  I cannot understand how any
one can wish to shame the thing he loves.  I love Sibyl Vane.  I want
to place her on a pedestal of gold and to see the world worship the
woman who is mine.  What is marriage?  An irrevocable vow.  You mock at
it for that.  Ah! don't mock.  It is an irrevocable vow that I want to
take.  Her trust makes me faithful, her belief makes me good.  When I
am with her, I regret all that you have taught me.  I become different
from what you have known me to be.  I am changed, and the mere touch of
Sibyl Vane's hand makes me forget you and all your wrong, fascinating,
poisonous, delightful theories."

"And those are ...?" asked Lord Henry, helping himself to some salad.

"Oh, your theories about life, your theories about love, your theories
about pleasure.  All your theories, in fact, Harry."

"Pleasure is the only thing worth having a theory about," he answered
in his slow melodious voice.  "But I am afraid I cannot claim my theory
as my own.  It belongs to Nature, not to me.  Pleasure is Nature's
test, her sign of approval.  When we are happy, we are always good, but
when we are good, we are not always happy."

"Ah! but what do you mean by good?" cried Basil Hallward.

"Yes," echoed Dorian, leaning back in his chair and looking at Lord
Henry over the heavy clusters of purple-lipped irises that stood in the
centre of the table, "what do you mean by good, Harry?"

"To be good is to be in harmony with one's self," he replied, touching
the thin stem of his glass with his pale, fine-pointed fingers.
"Discord is to be forced to be in harmony with others.  One's own
life--that is the important thing.  As for the lives of one's
neighbours, if one wishes to be a prig or a Puritan, one can flaunt
one's moral views about them, but they are not one's concern.  Besides,
individualism has really the higher aim.  Modern morality consists in
accepting the standard of one's age.  I consider that for any man of
culture to accept the standard of his age is a form of the grossest
immorality."

"But, surely, if one lives merely for one's self, Harry, one pays a
terrible price for doing so?" suggested the painter.

"Yes, we are overcharged for everything nowadays.  I should fancy that
the real tragedy of the poor is that they can afford nothing but
self-denial. Beautiful sins, like beautiful things, are the privilege
of the rich."

"One has to pay in other ways but money."

"What sort of ways, Basil?"

"Oh!  I should fancy in remorse, in suffering, in ... well, in the
consciousness of degradation."

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.  "My dear fellow, mediaeval art is
charming, but mediaeval emotions are out of date.  One can use them in
fiction, of course.  But then the only things that one can use in
fiction are the things that one has ceased to use in fact.  Believe me,
no civilized man ever regrets a pleasure, and no uncivilized man ever
knows what a pleasure is."

"I know what pleasure is," cried Dorian Gray.  "It is to adore some
one."

"That is certainly better than being adored," he answered, toying with
some fruits.  "Being adored is a nuisance.  Women treat us just as
humanity treats its gods.  They worship us, and are always bothering us
to do something for them."

"I should have said that whatever they ask for they had first given to
us," murmured the lad gravely.  "They create love in our natures.  They
have a right to demand it back."

"That is quite true, Dorian," cried Hallward.

"Nothing is ever quite true," said Lord Henry.

"This is," interrupted Dorian.  "You must admit, Harry, that women give
to men the very gold of their lives."

"Possibly," he sighed, "but they invariably want it back in such very
small change.  That is the worry.  Women, as some witty Frenchman once
put it, inspire us with the desire to do masterpieces and always
prevent us from carrying them out."

"Harry, you are dreadful!  I don't know why I like you so much."

"You will always like me, Dorian," he replied.  "Will you have some
coffee, you fellows?  Waiter, bring coffee, and _fine-champagne_, and
some cigarettes.  No, don't mind the cigarettes--I have some.  Basil, I
can't allow you to smoke cigars.  You must have a cigarette.  A
cigarette is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure.  It is exquisite,
and it leaves one unsatisfied.  What more can one want?  Yes, Dorian,
you will always be fond of me.  I represent to you all the sins you
have never had the courage to commit."

"What nonsense you talk, Harry!" cried the lad, taking a light from a
fire-breathing silver dragon that the waiter had placed on the table.
"Let us go down to the theatre.  When Sibyl comes on the stage you will
have a new ideal of life.  She will represent something to you that you
have never known."

"I have known everything," said Lord Henry, with a tired look in his
eyes, "but I am always ready for a new emotion.  I am afraid, however,
that, for me at any rate, there is no such thing.  Still, your
wonderful girl may thrill me.  I love acting.  It is so much more real
than life.  Let us go.  Dorian, you will come with me.  I am so sorry,
Basil, but there is only room for two in the brougham.  You must follow
us in a hansom."

They got up and put on their coats, sipping their coffee standing.  The
painter was silent and preoccupied.  There was a gloom over him.  He
could not bear this marriage, and yet it seemed to him to be better
than many other things that might have happened.  After a few minutes,
they all passed downstairs.  He drove off by himself, as had been
arranged, and watched the flashing lights of the little brougham in
front of him.  A strange sense of loss came over him.  He felt that
Dorian Gray would never again be to him all that he had been in the
past.  Life had come between them.... His eyes darkened, and the
crowded flaring streets became blurred to his eyes.  When the cab drew
up at the theatre, it seemed to him that he had grown years older.



CHAPTER 7

For some reason or other, the house was crowded that night, and the fat
Jew manager who met them at the door was beaming from ear to ear with
an oily tremulous smile.  He escorted them to their box with a sort of
pompous humility, waving his fat jewelled hands and talking at the top
of his voice.  Dorian Gray loathed him more than ever.  He felt as if
he had come to look for Miranda and had been met by Caliban.  Lord
Henry, upon the other hand, rather liked him.  At least he declared he
did, and insisted on shaking him by the hand and assuring him that he
was proud to meet a man who had discovered a real genius and gone
bankrupt over a poet.  Hallward amused himself with watching the faces
in the pit.  The heat was terribly oppressive, and the huge sunlight
flamed like a monstrous dahlia with petals of yellow fire.  The youths
in the gallery had taken off their coats and waistcoats and hung them
over the side.  They talked to each other across the theatre and shared
their oranges with the tawdry girls who sat beside them.  Some women
were laughing in the pit.  Their voices were horribly shrill and
discordant.  The sound of the popping of corks came from the bar.

"What a place to find one's divinity in!" said Lord Henry.

"Yes!" answered Dorian Gray.  "It was here I found her, and she is
divine beyond all living things.  When she acts, you will forget
everything.  These common rough people, with their coarse faces and
brutal gestures, become quite different when she is on the stage.  They
sit silently and watch her.  They weep and laugh as she wills them to
do.  She makes them as responsive as a violin.  She spiritualizes them,
and one feels that they are of the same flesh and blood as one's self."

"The same flesh and blood as one's self!  Oh, I hope not!" exclaimed
Lord Henry, who was scanning the occupants of the gallery through his
opera-glass.

"Don't pay any attention to him, Dorian," said the painter.  "I
understand what you mean, and I believe in this girl.  Any one you love
must be marvellous, and any girl who has the effect you describe must
be fine and noble.  To spiritualize one's age--that is something worth
doing.  If this girl can give a soul to those who have lived without
one, if she can create the sense of beauty in people whose lives have
been sordid and ugly, if she can strip them of their selfishness and
lend them tears for sorrows that are not their own, she is worthy of
all your adoration, worthy of the adoration of the world.  This
marriage is quite right.  I did not think so at first, but I admit it
now.  The gods made Sibyl Vane for you.  Without her you would have
been incomplete."

"Thanks, Basil," answered Dorian Gray, pressing his hand.  "I knew that
you would understand me.  Harry is so cynical, he terrifies me.  But
here is the orchestra.  It is quite dreadful, but it only lasts for
about five minutes.  Then the curtain rises, and you will see the girl
to whom I am going to give all my life, to whom I have given everything
that is good in me."

A quarter of an hour afterwards, amidst an extraordinary turmoil of
applause, Sibyl Vane stepped on to the stage.  Yes, she was certainly
lovely to look at--one of the loveliest creatures, Lord Henry thought,
that he had ever seen.  There was something of the fawn in her shy
grace and startled eyes.  A faint blush, like the shadow of a rose in a
mirror of silver, came to her cheeks as she glanced at the crowded
enthusiastic house.  She stepped back a few paces and her lips seemed
to tremble.  Basil Hallward leaped to his feet and began to applaud.
Motionless, and as one in a dream, sat Dorian Gray, gazing at her.
Lord Henry peered through his glasses, murmuring, "Charming! charming!"

The scene was the hall of Capulet's house, and Romeo in his pilgrim's
dress had entered with Mercutio and his other friends.  The band, such
as it was, struck up a few bars of music, and the dance began.  Through
the crowd of ungainly, shabbily dressed actors, Sibyl Vane moved like a
creature from a finer world.  Her body swayed, while she danced, as a
plant sways in the water.  The curves of her throat were the curves of
a white lily.  Her hands seemed to be made of cool ivory.

Yet she was curiously listless.  She showed no sign of joy when her
eyes rested on Romeo.  The few words she had to speak--

    Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
        Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
    For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
        And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss--

with the brief dialogue that follows, were spoken in a thoroughly
artificial manner.  The voice was exquisite, but from the point of view
of tone it was absolutely false.  It was wrong in colour.  It took away
all the life from the verse.  It made the passion unreal.

Dorian Gray grew pale as he watched her.  He was puzzled and anxious.
Neither of his friends dared to say anything to him.  She seemed to
them to be absolutely incompetent.  They were horribly disappointed.

Yet they felt that the true test of any Juliet is the balcony scene of
the second act.  They waited for that.  If she failed there, there was
nothing in her.

She looked charming as she came out in the moonlight.  That could not
be denied.  But the staginess of her acting was unbearable, and grew
worse as she went on.  Her gestures became absurdly artificial.  She
overemphasized everything that she had to say.  The beautiful passage--

    Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,
    Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
    For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night--

was declaimed with the painful precision of a schoolgirl who has been
taught to recite by some second-rate professor of elocution. When she
leaned over the balcony and came to those wonderful lines--

        Although I joy in thee,
    I have no joy of this contract to-night:
    It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;
    Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
    Ere one can say, "It lightens."  Sweet, good-night!
    This bud of love by summer's ripening breath
    May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet--

she spoke the words as though they conveyed no meaning to her. It was
not nervousness. Indeed, so far from being nervous, she was absolutely
self-contained. It was simply bad art. She was a complete failure.

Even the common uneducated audience of the pit and gallery lost their
interest in the play. They got restless, and began to talk loudly and
to whistle. The Jew manager, who was standing at the back of the
dress-circle, stamped and swore with rage. The only person unmoved was
the girl herself.

When the second act was over, there came a storm of hisses, and Lord
Henry got up from his chair and put on his coat.  "She is quite
beautiful, Dorian," he said, "but she can't act.  Let us go."

"I am going to see the play through," answered the lad, in a hard
bitter voice.  "I am awfully sorry that I have made you waste an
evening, Harry.  I apologize to you both."

"My dear Dorian, I should think Miss Vane was ill," interrupted
Hallward.  "We will come some other night."

"I wish she were ill," he rejoined.  "But she seems to me to be simply
callous and cold.  She has entirely altered.  Last night she was a
great artist.  This evening she is merely a commonplace mediocre
actress."

"Don't talk like that about any one you love, Dorian.  Love is a more
wonderful thing than art."

"They are both simply forms of imitation," remarked Lord Henry.  "But
do let us go.  Dorian, you must not stay here any longer.  It is not
good for one's morals to see bad acting.  Besides, I don't suppose you
will want your wife to act, so what does it matter if she plays Juliet
like a wooden doll?  She is very lovely, and if she knows as little
about life as she does about acting, she will be a delightful
experience.  There are only two kinds of people who are really
fascinating--people who know absolutely everything, and people who know
absolutely nothing.  Good heavens, my dear boy, don't look so tragic!
The secret of remaining young is never to have an emotion that is
unbecoming.  Come to the club with Basil and myself.  We will smoke
cigarettes and drink to the beauty of Sibyl Vane.  She is beautiful.
What more can you want?"

"Go away, Harry," cried the lad.  "I want to be alone.  Basil, you must
go.  Ah! can't you see that my heart is breaking?"  The hot tears came
to his eyes.  His lips trembled, and rushing to the back of the box, he
leaned up against the wall, hiding his face in his hands.

"Let us go, Basil," said Lord Henry with a strange tenderness in his
voice, and the two young men passed out together.

A few moments afterwards the footlights flared up and the curtain rose
on the third act.  Dorian Gray went back to his seat.  He looked pale,
and proud, and indifferent.  The play dragged on, and seemed
interminable.  Half of the audience went out, tramping in heavy boots
and laughing.  The whole thing was a _fiasco_.  The last act was played
to almost empty benches.  The curtain went down on a titter and some
groans.

As soon as it was over, Dorian Gray rushed behind the scenes into the
greenroom.  The girl was standing there alone, with a look of triumph
on her face.  Her eyes were lit with an exquisite fire.  There was a
radiance about her.  Her parted lips were smiling over some secret of
their own.

When he entered, she looked at him, and an expression of infinite joy
came over her.  "How badly I acted to-night, Dorian!" she cried.

"Horribly!" he answered, gazing at her in amazement.  "Horribly!  It
was dreadful.  Are you ill?  You have no idea what it was.  You have no
idea what I suffered."

The girl smiled.  "Dorian," she answered, lingering over his name with
long-drawn music in her voice, as though it were sweeter than honey to
the red petals of her mouth.  "Dorian, you should have understood.  But
you understand now, don't you?"

"Understand what?" he asked, angrily.

"Why I was so bad to-night. Why I shall always be bad.  Why I shall
never act well again."

He shrugged his shoulders.  "You are ill, I suppose.  When you are ill
you shouldn't act.  You make yourself ridiculous.  My friends were
bored.  I was bored."

She seemed not to listen to him.  She was transfigured with joy.  An
ecstasy of happiness dominated her.

"Dorian, Dorian," she cried, "before I knew you, acting was the one
reality of my life.  It was only in the theatre that I lived.  I
thought that it was all true.  I was Rosalind one night and Portia the
other.  The joy of Beatrice was my joy, and the sorrows of Cordelia
were mine also.  I believed in everything.  The common people who acted
with me seemed to me to be godlike.  The painted scenes were my world.
I knew nothing but shadows, and I thought them real.  You came--oh, my
beautiful love!--and you freed my soul from prison.  You taught me what
reality really is.  To-night, for the first time in my life, I saw
through the hollowness, the sham, the silliness of the empty pageant in
which I had always played.  To-night, for the first time, I became
conscious that the Romeo was hideous, and old, and painted, that the
moonlight in the orchard was false, that the scenery was vulgar, and
that the words I had to speak were unreal, were not my words, were not
what I wanted to say.  You had brought me something higher, something
of which all art is but a reflection.  You had made me understand what
love really is.  My love!  My love!  Prince Charming!  Prince of life!
I have grown sick of shadows.  You are more to me than all art can ever
be.  What have I to do with the puppets of a play?  When I came on
to-night, I could not understand how it was that everything had gone
from me.  I thought that I was going to be wonderful.  I found that I
could do nothing.  Suddenly it dawned on my soul what it all meant.
The knowledge was exquisite to me.  I heard them hissing, and I smiled.
What could they know of love such as ours?  Take me away, Dorian--take
me away with you, where we can be quite alone.  I hate the stage.  I
might mimic a passion that I do not feel, but I cannot mimic one that
burns me like fire.  Oh, Dorian, Dorian, you understand now what it
signifies?  Even if I could do it, it would be profanation for me to
play at being in love.  You have made me see that."

He flung himself down on the sofa and turned away his face.  "You have
killed my love," he muttered.

She looked at him in wonder and laughed.  He made no answer.  She came
across to him, and with her little fingers stroked his hair.  She knelt
down and pressed his hands to her lips.  He drew them away, and a
shudder ran through him.

Then he leaped up and went to the door.  "Yes," he cried, "you have
killed my love.  You used to stir my imagination.  Now you don't even
stir my curiosity.  You simply produce no effect.  I loved you because
you were marvellous, because you had genius and intellect, because you
realized the dreams of great poets and gave shape and substance to the
shadows of art.  You have thrown it all away.  You are shallow and
stupid.  My God! how mad I was to love you!  What a fool I have been!
You are nothing to me now.  I will never see you again.  I will never
think of you.  I will never mention your name.  You don't know what you
were to me, once.  Why, once ... Oh, I can't bear to think of it!  I
wish I had never laid eyes upon you!  You have spoiled the romance of
my life.  How little you can know of love, if you say it mars your art!
Without your art, you are nothing.  I would have made you famous,
splendid, magnificent.  The world would have worshipped you, and you
would have borne my name.  What are you now?  A third-rate actress with
a pretty face."

The girl grew white, and trembled.  She clenched her hands together,
and her voice seemed to catch in her throat.  "You are not serious,
Dorian?" she murmured.  "You are acting."

"Acting!  I leave that to you.  You do it so well," he answered
bitterly.

She rose from her knees and, with a piteous expression of pain in her
face, came across the room to him.  She put her hand upon his arm and
looked into his eyes.  He thrust her back.  "Don't touch me!" he cried.

A low moan broke from her, and she flung herself at his feet and lay
there like a trampled flower.  "Dorian, Dorian, don't leave me!" she
whispered.  "I am so sorry I didn't act well.  I was thinking of you
all the time.  But I will try--indeed, I will try.  It came so suddenly
across me, my love for you.  I think I should never have known it if
you had not kissed me--if we had not kissed each other.  Kiss me again,
my love.  Don't go away from me.  I couldn't bear it.  Oh! don't go
away from me.  My brother ... No; never mind.  He didn't mean it.  He
was in jest.... But you, oh! can't you forgive me for to-night? I will
work so hard and try to improve.  Don't be cruel to me, because I love
you better than anything in the world.  After all, it is only once that
I have not pleased you.  But you are quite right, Dorian.  I should
have shown myself more of an artist.  It was foolish of me, and yet I
couldn't help it.  Oh, don't leave me, don't leave me." A fit of
passionate sobbing choked her.  She crouched on the floor like a
wounded thing, and Dorian Gray, with his beautiful eyes, looked down at
her, and his chiselled lips curled in exquisite disdain.  There is
always something ridiculous about the emotions of people whom one has
ceased to love.  Sibyl Vane seemed to him to be absurdly melodramatic.
Her tears and sobs annoyed him.

"I am going," he said at last in his calm clear voice.  "I don't wish
to be unkind, but I can't see you again.  You have disappointed me."

She wept silently, and made no answer, but crept nearer.  Her little
hands stretched blindly out, and appeared to be seeking for him.  He
turned on his heel and left the room.  In a few moments he was out of
the theatre.

Where he went to he hardly knew.  He remembered wandering through dimly
lit streets, past gaunt, black-shadowed archways and evil-looking
houses.  Women with hoarse voices and harsh laughter had called after
him.  Drunkards had reeled by, cursing and chattering to themselves
like monstrous apes.  He had seen grotesque children huddled upon
door-steps, and heard shrieks and oaths from gloomy courts.

As the dawn was just breaking, he found himself close to Covent Garden.
The darkness lifted, and, flushed with faint fires, the sky hollowed
itself into a perfect pearl.  Huge carts filled with nodding lilies
rumbled slowly down the polished empty street.  The air was heavy with
the perfume of the flowers, and their beauty seemed to bring him an
anodyne for his pain.  He followed into the market and watched the men
unloading their waggons.  A white-smocked carter offered him some
cherries.  He thanked him, wondered why he refused to accept any money
for them, and began to eat them listlessly.  They had been plucked at
midnight, and the coldness of the moon had entered into them.  A long
line of boys carrying crates of striped tulips, and of yellow and red
roses, defiled in front of him, threading their way through the huge,
jade-green piles of vegetables.  Under the portico, with its grey,
sun-bleached pillars, loitered a troop of draggled bareheaded girls,
waiting for the auction to be over.  Others crowded round the swinging
doors of the coffee-house in the piazza.  The heavy cart-horses slipped
and stamped upon the rough stones, shaking their bells and trappings.
Some of the drivers were lying asleep on a pile of sacks.  Iris-necked
and pink-footed, the pigeons ran about picking up seeds.

After a little while, he hailed a hansom and drove home.  For a few
moments he loitered upon the doorstep, looking round at the silent
square, with its blank, close-shuttered windows and its staring blinds.
The sky was pure opal now, and the roofs of the houses glistened like
silver against it.  From some chimney opposite a thin wreath of smoke
was rising.  It curled, a violet riband, through the nacre-coloured air.

In the huge gilt Venetian lantern, spoil of some Doge's barge, that
hung from the ceiling of the great, oak-panelled hall of entrance,
lights were still burning from three flickering jets: thin blue petals
of flame they seemed, rimmed with white fire.  He turned them out and,
having thrown his hat and cape on the table, passed through the library
towards the door of his bedroom, a large octagonal chamber on the
ground floor that, in his new-born feeling for luxury, he had just had
decorated for himself and hung with some curious Renaissance tapestries
that had been discovered stored in a disused attic at Selby Royal.  As
he was turning the handle of the door, his eye fell upon the portrait
Basil Hallward had painted of him.  He started back as if in surprise.
Then he went on into his own room, looking somewhat puzzled.  After he
had taken the button-hole out of his coat, he seemed to hesitate.
Finally, he came back, went over to the picture, and examined it.  In
the dim arrested light that struggled through the cream-coloured silk
blinds, the face appeared to him to be a little changed.  The
expression looked different.  One would have said that there was a
touch of cruelty in the mouth.  It was certainly strange.

He turned round and, walking to the window, drew up the blind.  The
bright dawn flooded the room and swept the fantastic shadows into dusky
corners, where they lay shuddering.  But the strange expression that he
had noticed in the face of the portrait seemed to linger there, to be
more intensified even.  The quivering ardent sunlight showed him the
lines of cruelty round the mouth as clearly as if he had been looking
into a mirror after he had done some dreadful thing.

He winced and, taking up from the table an oval glass framed in ivory
Cupids, one of Lord Henry's many presents to him, glanced hurriedly
into its polished depths.  No line like that warped his red lips.  What
did it mean?

He rubbed his eyes, and came close to the picture, and examined it
again.  There were no signs of any change when he looked into the
actual painting, and yet there was no doubt that the whole expression
had altered.  It was not a mere fancy of his own.  The thing was
horribly apparent.

He threw himself into a chair and began to think.  Suddenly there
flashed across his mind what he had said in Basil Hallward's studio the
day the picture had been finished.  Yes, he remembered it perfectly.
He had uttered a mad wish that he himself might remain young, and the
portrait grow old; that his own beauty might be untarnished, and the
face on the canvas bear the burden of his passions and his sins; that
the painted image might be seared with the lines of suffering and
thought, and that he might keep all the delicate bloom and loveliness
of his then just conscious boyhood.  Surely his wish had not been
fulfilled?  Such things were impossible.  It seemed monstrous even to
think of them.  And, yet, there was the picture before him, with the
touch of cruelty in the mouth.

Cruelty!  Had he been cruel?  It was the girl's fault, not his.  He had
dreamed of her as a great artist, had given his love to her because he
had thought her great.  Then she had disappointed him.  She had been
shallow and unworthy.  And, yet, a feeling of infinite regret came over
him, as he thought of her lying at his feet sobbing like a little
child.  He remembered with what callousness he had watched her.  Why
had he been made like that?  Why had such a soul been given to him?
But he had suffered also.  During the three terrible hours that the
play had lasted, he had lived centuries of pain, aeon upon aeon of
torture.  His life was well worth hers.  She had marred him for a
moment, if he had wounded her for an age.  Besides, women were better
suited to bear sorrow than men.  They lived on their emotions.  They
only thought of their emotions.  When they took lovers, it was merely
to have some one with whom they could have scenes.  Lord Henry had told
him that, and Lord Henry knew what women were.  Why should he trouble
about Sibyl Vane?  She was nothing to him now.

But the picture?  What was he to say of that?  It held the secret of
his life, and told his story.  It had taught him to love his own
beauty.  Would it teach him to loathe his own soul?  Would he ever look
at it again?

No; it was merely an illusion wrought on the troubled senses.  The
horrible night that he had passed had left phantoms behind it.
Suddenly there had fallen upon his brain that tiny scarlet speck that
makes men mad.  The picture had not changed.  It was folly to think so.

Yet it was watching him, with its beautiful marred face and its cruel
smile.  Its bright hair gleamed in the early sunlight.  Its blue eyes
met his own.  A sense of infinite pity, not for himself, but for the
painted image of himself, came over him.  It had altered already, and
would alter more.  Its gold would wither into grey.  Its red and white
roses would die.  For every sin that he committed, a stain would fleck
and wreck its fairness.  But he would not sin.  The picture, changed or
unchanged, would be to him the visible emblem of conscience.  He would
resist temptation.  He would not see Lord Henry any more--would not, at
any rate, listen to those subtle poisonous theories that in Basil
Hallward's garden had first stirred within him the passion for
impossible things.  He would go back to Sibyl Vane, make her amends,
marry her, try to love her again.  Yes, it was his duty to do so.  She
must have suffered more than he had.  Poor child!  He had been selfish
and cruel to her.  The fascination that she had exercised over him
would return.  They would be happy together.  His life with her would
be beautiful and pure.

He got up from his chair and drew a large screen right in front of the
portrait, shuddering as he glanced at it.  "How horrible!" he murmured
to himself, and he walked across to the window and opened it.  When he
stepped out on to the grass, he drew a deep breath.  The fresh morning
air seemed to drive away all his sombre passions.  He thought only of
Sibyl.  A faint echo of his love came back to him.  He repeated her
name over and over again.  The birds that were singing in the
dew-drenched garden seemed to be telling the flowers about her.



CHAPTER 8

It was long past noon when he awoke.  His valet had crept several times
on tiptoe into the room to see if he was stirring, and had wondered
what made his young master sleep so late.  Finally his bell sounded,
and Victor came in softly with a cup of tea, and a pile of letters, on
a small tray of old Sevres china, and drew back the olive-satin
curtains, with their shimmering blue lining, that hung in front of the
three tall windows.

"Monsieur has well slept this morning," he said, smiling.

"What o'clock is it, Victor?" asked Dorian Gray drowsily.

"One hour and a quarter, Monsieur."

How late it was!  He sat up, and having sipped some tea, turned over
his letters.  One of them was from Lord Henry, and had been brought by
hand that morning.  He hesitated for a moment, and then put it aside.
The others he opened listlessly.  They contained the usual collection
of cards, invitations to dinner, tickets for private views, programmes
of charity concerts, and the like that are showered on fashionable
young men every morning during the season.  There was a rather heavy
bill for a chased silver Louis-Quinze toilet-set that he had not yet
had the courage to send on to his guardians, who were extremely
old-fashioned people and did not realize that we live in an age when
unnecessary things are our only necessities; and there were several
very courteously worded communications from Jermyn Street money-lenders
offering to advance any sum of money at a moment's notice and at the
most reasonable rates of interest.

After about ten minutes he got up, and throwing on an elaborate
dressing-gown of silk-embroidered cashmere wool, passed into the
onyx-paved bathroom.  The cool water refreshed him after his long
sleep.  He seemed to have forgotten all that he had gone through.  A
dim sense of having taken part in some strange tragedy came to him once
or twice, but there was the unreality of a dream about it.

As soon as he was dressed, he went into the library and sat down to a
light French breakfast that had been laid out for him on a small round
table close to the open window.  It was an exquisite day.  The warm air
seemed laden with spices.  A bee flew in and buzzed round the
blue-dragon bowl that, filled with sulphur-yellow roses, stood before
him.  He felt perfectly happy.

Suddenly his eye fell on the screen that he had placed in front of the
portrait, and he started.

"Too cold for Monsieur?" asked his valet, putting an omelette on the
table.  "I shut the window?"

Dorian shook his head.  "I am not cold," he murmured.

Was it all true?  Had the portrait really changed?  Or had it been
simply his own imagination that had made him see a look of evil where
there had been a look of joy?  Surely a painted canvas could not alter?
The thing was absurd.  It would serve as a tale to tell Basil some day.
It would make him smile.

And, yet, how vivid was his recollection of the whole thing!  First in
the dim twilight, and then in the bright dawn, he had seen the touch of
cruelty round the warped lips.  He almost dreaded his valet leaving the
room.  He knew that when he was alone he would have to examine the
portrait.  He was afraid of certainty.  When the coffee and cigarettes
had been brought and the man turned to go, he felt a wild desire to
tell him to remain.  As the door was closing behind him, he called him
back.  The man stood waiting for his orders.  Dorian looked at him for
a moment.  "I am not at home to any one, Victor," he said with a sigh.
The man bowed and retired.

Then he rose from the table, lit a cigarette, and flung himself down on
a luxuriously cushioned couch that stood facing the screen.  The screen
was an old one, of gilt Spanish leather, stamped and wrought with a
rather florid Louis-Quatorze pattern.  He scanned it curiously,
wondering if ever before it had concealed the secret of a man's life.

Should he move it aside, after all?  Why not let it stay there?  What
was the use of knowing? If the thing was true, it was terrible.  If it
was not true, why trouble about it?  But what if, by some fate or
deadlier chance, eyes other than his spied behind and saw the horrible
change?  What should he do if Basil Hallward came and asked to look at
his own picture?  Basil would be sure to do that.  No; the thing had to
be examined, and at once.  Anything would be better than this dreadful
state of doubt.

He got up and locked both doors.  At least he would be alone when he
looked upon the mask of his shame.  Then he drew the screen aside and
saw himself face to face.  It was perfectly true.  The portrait had
altered.

As he often remembered afterwards, and always with no small wonder, he
found himself at first gazing at the portrait with a feeling of almost
scientific interest.  That such a change should have taken place was
incredible to him.  And yet it was a fact.  Was there some subtle
affinity between the chemical atoms that shaped themselves into form
and colour on the canvas and the soul that was within him?  Could it be
that what that soul thought, they realized?--that what it dreamed, they
made true?  Or was there some other, more terrible reason?  He
shuddered, and felt afraid, and, going back to the couch, lay there,
gazing at the picture in sickened horror.

One thing, however, he felt that it had done for him.  It had made him
conscious how unjust, how cruel, he had been to Sibyl Vane.  It was not
too late to make reparation for that.  She could still be his wife.
His unreal and selfish love would yield to some higher influence, would
be transformed into some nobler passion, and the portrait that Basil
Hallward had painted of him would be a guide to him through life, would
be to him what holiness is to some, and conscience to others, and the
fear of God to us all.  There were opiates for remorse, drugs that
could lull the moral sense to sleep.  But here was a visible symbol of
the degradation of sin.  Here was an ever-present sign of the ruin men
brought upon their souls.

Three o'clock struck, and four, and the half-hour rang its double
chime, but Dorian Gray did not stir.  He was trying to gather up the
scarlet threads of life and to weave them into a pattern; to find his
way through the sanguine labyrinth of passion through which he was
wandering.  He did not know what to do, or what to think.  Finally, he
went over to the table and wrote a passionate letter to the girl he had
loved, imploring her forgiveness and accusing himself of madness.  He
covered page after page with wild words of sorrow and wilder words of
pain.  There is a luxury in self-reproach. When we blame ourselves, we
feel that no one else has a right to blame us.  It is the confession,
not the priest, that gives us absolution.  When Dorian had finished the
letter, he felt that he had been forgiven.

Suddenly there came a knock to the door, and he heard Lord Henry's
voice outside.  "My dear boy, I must see you.  Let me in at once.  I
can't bear your shutting yourself up like this."

He made no answer at first, but remained quite still.  The knocking
still continued and grew louder.  Yes, it was better to let Lord Henry
in, and to explain to him the new life he was going to lead, to quarrel
with him if it became necessary to quarrel, to part if parting was
inevitable.  He jumped up, drew the screen hastily across the picture,
and unlocked the door.

"I am so sorry for it all, Dorian," said Lord Henry as he entered.
"But you must not think too much about it."

"Do you mean about Sibyl Vane?" asked the lad.

"Yes, of course," answered Lord Henry, sinking into a chair and slowly
pulling off his yellow gloves.  "It is dreadful, from one point of
view, but it was not your fault.  Tell me, did you go behind and see
her, after the play was over?"

"Yes."

"I felt sure you had.  Did you make a scene with her?"

"I was brutal, Harry--perfectly brutal.  But it is all right now.  I am
not sorry for anything that has happened.  It has taught me to know
myself better."

"Ah, Dorian, I am so glad you take it in that way!  I was afraid I
would find you plunged in remorse and tearing that nice curly hair of
yours."

"I have got through all that," said Dorian, shaking his head and
smiling.  "I am perfectly happy now.  I know what conscience is, to
begin with.  It is not what you told me it was.  It is the divinest
thing in us.  Don't sneer at it, Harry, any more--at least not before
me.  I want to be good.  I can't bear the idea of my soul being
hideous."

"A very charming artistic basis for ethics, Dorian!  I congratulate you
on it.  But how are you going to begin?"

"By marrying Sibyl Vane."

"Marrying Sibyl Vane!" cried Lord Henry, standing up and looking at him
in perplexed amazement.  "But, my dear Dorian--"

"Yes, Harry, I know what you are going to say.  Something dreadful
about marriage.  Don't say it.  Don't ever say things of that kind to
me again.  Two days ago I asked Sibyl to marry me.  I am not going to
break my word to her.  She is to be my wife."

"Your wife!  Dorian! ... Didn't you get my letter?  I wrote to you this
morning, and sent the note down by my own man."

"Your letter?  Oh, yes, I remember.  I have not read it yet, Harry.  I
was afraid there might be something in it that I wouldn't like.  You
cut life to pieces with your epigrams."

"You know nothing then?"

"What do you mean?"

Lord Henry walked across the room, and sitting down by Dorian Gray,
took both his hands in his own and held them tightly.  "Dorian," he
said, "my letter--don't be frightened--was to tell you that Sibyl Vane
is dead."

A cry of pain broke from the lad's lips, and he leaped to his feet,
tearing his hands away from Lord Henry's grasp.  "Dead!  Sibyl dead!
It is not true!  It is a horrible lie!  How dare you say it?"

"It is quite true, Dorian," said Lord Henry, gravely.  "It is in all
the morning papers.  I wrote down to you to ask you not to see any one
till I came.  There will have to be an inquest, of course, and you must
not be mixed up in it.  Things like that make a man fashionable in
Paris.  But in London people are so prejudiced.  Here, one should never
make one's _debut_ with a scandal.  One should reserve that to give an
interest to one's old age.  I suppose they don't know your name at the
theatre?  If they don't, it is all right.  Did any one see you going
round to her room?  That is an important point."

Dorian did not answer for a few moments.  He was dazed with horror.
Finally he stammered, in a stifled voice, "Harry, did you say an
inquest?  What did you mean by that?  Did Sibyl--? Oh, Harry, I can't
bear it!  But be quick.  Tell me everything at once."

"I have no doubt it was not an accident, Dorian, though it must be put
in that way to the public.  It seems that as she was leaving the
theatre with her mother, about half-past twelve or so, she said she had
forgotten something upstairs.  They waited some time for her, but she
did not come down again.  They ultimately found her lying dead on the
floor of her dressing-room. She had swallowed something by mistake,
some dreadful thing they use at theatres.  I don't know what it was,
but it had either prussic acid or white lead in it.  I should fancy it
was prussic acid, as she seems to have died instantaneously."

"Harry, Harry, it is terrible!" cried the lad.

"Yes; it is very tragic, of course, but you must not get yourself mixed
up in it.  I see by _The Standard_ that she was seventeen.  I should have
thought she was almost younger than that.  She looked such a child, and
seemed to know so little about acting.  Dorian, you mustn't let this
thing get on your nerves.  You must come and dine with me, and
afterwards we will look in at the opera.  It is a Patti night, and
everybody will be there.  You can come to my sister's box.  She has got
some smart women with her."

"So I have murdered Sibyl Vane," said Dorian Gray, half to himself,
"murdered her as surely as if I had cut her little throat with a knife.
Yet the roses are not less lovely for all that.  The birds sing just as
happily in my garden.  And to-night I am to dine with you, and then go
on to the opera, and sup somewhere, I suppose, afterwards.  How
extraordinarily dramatic life is!  If I had read all this in a book,
Harry, I think I would have wept over it.  Somehow, now that it has
happened actually, and to me, it seems far too wonderful for tears.
Here is the first passionate love-letter I have ever written in my
life.  Strange, that my first passionate love-letter should have been
addressed to a dead girl.  Can they feel, I wonder, those white silent
people we call the dead?  Sibyl!  Can she feel, or know, or listen?
Oh, Harry, how I loved her once!  It seems years ago to me now.  She
was everything to me.  Then came that dreadful night--was it really
only last night?--when she played so badly, and my heart almost broke.
She explained it all to me.  It was terribly pathetic.  But I was not
moved a bit.  I thought her shallow.  Suddenly something happened that
made me afraid.  I can't tell you what it was, but it was terrible.  I
said I would go back to her.  I felt I had done wrong.  And now she is
dead.  My God!  My God!  Harry, what shall I do?  You don't know the
danger I am in, and there is nothing to keep me straight.  She would
have done that for me.  She had no right to kill herself.  It was
selfish of her."

"My dear Dorian," answered Lord Henry, taking a cigarette from his case
and producing a gold-latten matchbox, "the only way a woman can ever
reform a man is by boring him so completely that he loses all possible
interest in life.  If you had married this girl, you would have been
wretched.  Of course, you would have treated her kindly.  One can
always be kind to people about whom one cares nothing.  But she would
have soon found out that you were absolutely indifferent to her.  And
when a woman finds that out about her husband, she either becomes
dreadfully dowdy, or wears very smart bonnets that some other woman's
husband has to pay for.  I say nothing about the social mistake, which
would have been abject--which, of course, I would not have allowed--but
I assure you that in any case the whole thing would have been an
absolute failure."

"I suppose it would," muttered the lad, walking up and down the room
and looking horribly pale.  "But I thought it was my duty.  It is not
my fault that this terrible tragedy has prevented my doing what was
right.  I remember your saying once that there is a fatality about good
resolutions--that they are always made too late.  Mine certainly were."

"Good resolutions are useless attempts to interfere with scientific
laws.  Their origin is pure vanity.  Their result is absolutely _nil_.
They give us, now and then, some of those luxurious sterile emotions
that have a certain charm for the weak.  That is all that can be said
for them.  They are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where they
have no account."

"Harry," cried Dorian Gray, coming over and sitting down beside him,
"why is it that I cannot feel this tragedy as much as I want to?  I
don't think I am heartless.  Do you?"

"You have done too many foolish things during the last fortnight to be
entitled to give yourself that name, Dorian," answered Lord Henry with
his sweet melancholy smile.

The lad frowned.  "I don't like that explanation, Harry," he rejoined,
"but I am glad you don't think I am heartless.  I am nothing of the
kind.  I know I am not.  And yet I must admit that this thing that has
happened does not affect me as it should.  It seems to me to be simply
like a wonderful ending to a wonderful play.  It has all the terrible
beauty of a Greek tragedy, a tragedy in which I took a great part, but
by which I have not been wounded."

"It is an interesting question," said Lord Henry, who found an
exquisite pleasure in playing on the lad's unconscious egotism, "an
extremely interesting question.  I fancy that the true explanation is
this:  It often happens that the real tragedies of life occur in such
an inartistic manner that they hurt us by their crude violence, their
absolute incoherence, their absurd want of meaning, their entire lack
of style.  They affect us just as vulgarity affects us.  They give us
an impression of sheer brute force, and we revolt against that.
Sometimes, however, a tragedy that possesses artistic elements of
beauty crosses our lives.  If these elements of beauty are real, the
whole thing simply appeals to our sense of dramatic effect.  Suddenly
we find that we are no longer the actors, but the spectators of the
play.  Or rather we are both.  We watch ourselves, and the mere wonder
of the spectacle enthralls us.  In the present case, what is it that
has really happened?  Some one has killed herself for love of you.  I
wish that I had ever had such an experience.  It would have made me in
love with love for the rest of my life.  The people who have adored
me--there have not been very many, but there have been some--have
always insisted on living on, long after I had ceased to care for them,
or they to care for me.  They have become stout and tedious, and when I
meet them, they go in at once for reminiscences.  That awful memory of
woman!  What a fearful thing it is!  And what an utter intellectual
stagnation it reveals!  One should absorb the colour of life, but one
should never remember its details.  Details are always vulgar."

"I must sow poppies in my garden," sighed Dorian.

"There is no necessity," rejoined his companion.  "Life has always
poppies in her hands.  Of course, now and then things linger.  I once
wore nothing but violets all through one season, as a form of artistic
mourning for a romance that would not die.  Ultimately, however, it did
die.  I forget what killed it.  I think it was her proposing to
sacrifice the whole world for me.  That is always a dreadful moment.
It fills one with the terror of eternity.  Well--would you believe
it?--a week ago, at Lady Hampshire's, I found myself seated at dinner
next the lady in question, and she insisted on going over the whole
thing again, and digging up the past, and raking up the future.  I had
buried my romance in a bed of asphodel.  She dragged it out again and
assured me that I had spoiled her life.  I am bound to state that she
ate an enormous dinner, so I did not feel any anxiety.  But what a lack
of taste she showed!  The one charm of the past is that it is the past.
But women never know when the curtain has fallen.  They always want a
sixth act, and as soon as the interest of the play is entirely over,
they propose to continue it.  If they were allowed their own way, every
comedy would have a tragic ending, and every tragedy would culminate in
a farce.  They are charmingly artificial, but they have no sense of
art.  You are more fortunate than I am.  I assure you, Dorian, that not
one of the women I have known would have done for me what Sibyl Vane
did for you.  Ordinary women always console themselves.  Some of them
do it by going in for sentimental colours.  Never trust a woman who
wears mauve, whatever her age may be, or a woman over thirty-five who
is fond of pink ribbons.  It always means that they have a history.
Others find a great consolation in suddenly discovering the good
qualities of their husbands.  They flaunt their conjugal felicity in
one's face, as if it were the most fascinating of sins.  Religion
consoles some.  Its mysteries have all the charm of a flirtation, a
woman once told me, and I can quite understand it.  Besides, nothing
makes one so vain as being told that one is a sinner.  Conscience makes
egotists of us all.  Yes; there is really no end to the consolations
that women find in modern life.  Indeed, I have not mentioned the most
important one."

"What is that, Harry?" said the lad listlessly.

"Oh, the obvious consolation.  Taking some one else's admirer when one
loses one's own.  In good society that always whitewashes a woman.  But
really, Dorian, how different Sibyl Vane must have been from all the
women one meets!  There is something to me quite beautiful about her
death.  I am glad I am living in a century when such wonders happen.
They make one believe in the reality of the things we all play with,
such as romance, passion, and love."

"I was terribly cruel to her.  You forget that."

"I am afraid that women appreciate cruelty, downright cruelty, more
than anything else.  They have wonderfully primitive instincts.  We
have emancipated them, but they remain slaves looking for their
masters, all the same.  They love being dominated.  I am sure you were
splendid.  I have never seen you really and absolutely angry, but I can
fancy how delightful you looked.  And, after all, you said something to
me the day before yesterday that seemed to me at the time to be merely
fanciful, but that I see now was absolutely true, and it holds the key
to everything."

"What was that, Harry?"

"You said to me that Sibyl Vane represented to you all the heroines of
romance--that she was Desdemona one night, and Ophelia the other; that
if she died as Juliet, she came to life as Imogen."

"She will never come to life again now," muttered the lad, burying his
face in his hands.

"No, she will never come to life.  She has played her last part.  But
you must think of that lonely death in the tawdry dressing-room simply
as a strange lurid fragment from some Jacobean tragedy, as a wonderful
scene from Webster, or Ford, or Cyril Tourneur.  The girl never really
lived, and so she has never really died.  To you at least she was
always a dream, a phantom that flitted through Shakespeare's plays and
left them lovelier for its presence, a reed through which Shakespeare's
music sounded richer and more full of joy.  The moment she touched
actual life, she marred it, and it marred her, and so she passed away.
Mourn for Ophelia, if you like.  Put ashes on your head because
Cordelia was strangled.  Cry out against Heaven because the daughter of
Brabantio died.  But don't waste your tears over Sibyl Vane.  She was
less real than they are."

There was a silence.  The evening darkened in the room.  Noiselessly,
and with silver feet, the shadows crept in from the garden.  The
colours faded wearily out of things.

After some time Dorian Gray looked up.  "You have explained me to
myself, Harry," he murmured with something of a sigh of relief.  "I
felt all that you have said, but somehow I was afraid of it, and I
could not express it to myself.  How well you know me!  But we will not
talk again of what has happened.  It has been a marvellous experience.
That is all.  I wonder if life has still in store for me anything as
marvellous."

"Life has everything in store for you, Dorian.  There is nothing that
you, with your extraordinary good looks, will not be able to do."

"But suppose, Harry, I became haggard, and old, and wrinkled?  What
then?"

"Ah, then," said Lord Henry, rising to go, "then, my dear Dorian, you
would have to fight for your victories.  As it is, they are brought to
you.  No, you must keep your good looks.  We live in an age that reads
too much to be wise, and that thinks too much to be beautiful.  We
cannot spare you.  And now you had better dress and drive down to the
club.  We are rather late, as it is."

"I think I shall join you at the opera, Harry.  I feel too tired to eat
anything.  What is the number of your sister's box?"

"Twenty-seven, I believe.  It is on the grand tier.  You will see her
name on the door.  But I am sorry you won't come and dine."

"I don't feel up to it," said Dorian listlessly.  "But I am awfully
obliged to you for all that you have said to me.  You are certainly my
best friend.  No one has ever understood me as you have."

"We are only at the beginning of our friendship, Dorian," answered Lord
Henry, shaking him by the hand.  "Good-bye. I shall see you before
nine-thirty, I hope.  Remember, Patti is singing."

As he closed the door behind him, Dorian Gray touched the bell, and in
a few minutes Victor appeared with the lamps and drew the blinds down.
He waited impatiently for him to go.  The man seemed to take an
interminable time over everything.

As soon as he had left, he rushed to the screen and drew it back.  No;
there was no further change in the picture.  It had received the news
of Sibyl Vane's death before he had known of it himself.  It was
conscious of the events of life as they occurred.  The vicious cruelty
that marred the fine lines of the mouth had, no doubt, appeared at the
very moment that the girl had drunk the poison, whatever it was.  Or
was it indifferent to results?  Did it merely take cognizance of what
passed within the soul?  He wondered, and hoped that some day he would
see the change taking place before his very eyes, shuddering as he
hoped it.

Poor Sibyl!  What a romance it had all been!  She had often mimicked
death on the stage.  Then Death himself had touched her and taken her
with him.  How had she played that dreadful last scene?  Had she cursed
him, as she died?  No; she had died for love of him, and love would
always be a sacrament to him now.  She had atoned for everything by the
sacrifice she had made of her life.  He would not think any more of
what she had made him go through, on that horrible night at the
theatre.  When he thought of her, it would be as a wonderful tragic
figure sent on to the world's stage to show the supreme reality of
love.  A wonderful tragic figure?  Tears came to his eyes as he
remembered her childlike look, and winsome fanciful ways, and shy
tremulous grace.  He brushed them away hastily and looked again at the
picture.

He felt that the time had really come for making his choice.  Or had
his choice already been made?  Yes, life had decided that for
him--life, and his own infinite curiosity about life.  Eternal youth,
infinite passion, pleasures subtle and secret, wild joys and wilder
sins--he was to have all these things.  The portrait was to bear the
burden of his shame: that was all.

A feeling of pain crept over him as he thought of the desecration that
was in store for the fair face on the canvas.  Once, in boyish mockery
of Narcissus, he had kissed, or feigned to kiss, those painted lips
that now smiled so cruelly at him.  Morning after morning he had sat
before the portrait wondering at its beauty, almost enamoured of it, as
it seemed to him at times.  Was it to alter now with every mood to
which he yielded?  Was it to become a monstrous and loathsome thing, to
be hidden away in a locked room, to be shut out from the sunlight that
had so often touched to brighter gold the waving wonder of its hair?
The pity of it! the pity of it!

For a moment, he thought of praying that the horrible sympathy that
existed between him and the picture might cease.  It had changed in
answer to a prayer; perhaps in answer to a prayer it might remain
unchanged.  And yet, who, that knew anything about life, would
surrender the chance of remaining always young, however fantastic that
chance might be, or with what fateful consequences it might be fraught?
Besides, was it really under his control?  Had it indeed been prayer
that had produced the substitution?  Might there not be some curious
scientific reason for it all?  If thought could exercise its influence
upon a living organism, might not thought exercise an influence upon
dead and inorganic things?  Nay, without thought or conscious desire,
might not things external to ourselves vibrate in unison with our moods
and passions, atom calling to atom in secret love or strange affinity?
But the reason was of no importance.  He would never again tempt by a
prayer any terrible power.  If the picture was to alter, it was to
alter.  That was all.  Why inquire too closely into it?

For there would be a real pleasure in watching it.  He would be able to
follow his mind into its secret places.  This portrait would be to him
the most magical of mirrors.  As it had revealed to him his own body,
so it would reveal to him his own soul.  And when winter came upon it,
he would still be standing where spring trembles on the verge of
summer.  When the blood crept from its face, and left behind a pallid
mask of chalk with leaden eyes, he would keep the glamour of boyhood.
Not one blossom of his loveliness would ever fade.  Not one pulse of
his life would ever weaken.  Like the gods of the Greeks, he would be
strong, and fleet, and joyous.  What did it matter what happened to the
coloured image on the canvas?  He would be safe.  That was everything.

He drew the screen back into its former place in front of the picture,
smiling as he did so, and passed into his bedroom, where his valet was
already waiting for him.  An hour later he was at the opera, and Lord
Henry was leaning over his chair.



CHAPTER 9

As he was sitting at breakfast next morning, Basil Hallward was shown
into the room.

"I am so glad I have found you, Dorian," he said gravely.  "I called
last night, and they told me you were at the opera.  Of course, I knew
that was impossible.  But I wish you had left word where you had really
gone to.  I passed a dreadful evening, half afraid that one tragedy
might be followed by another.  I think you might have telegraphed for
me when you heard of it first.  I read of it quite by chance in a late
edition of _The Globe_ that I picked up at the club.  I came here at once
and was miserable at not finding you.  I can't tell you how
heart-broken I am about the whole thing.  I know what you must suffer.
But where were you?  Did you go down and see the girl's mother?  For a
moment I thought of following you there.  They gave the address in the
paper.  Somewhere in the Euston Road, isn't it?  But I was afraid of
intruding upon a sorrow that I could not lighten.  Poor woman!  What a
state she must be in!  And her only child, too!  What did she say about
it all?"

"My dear Basil, how do I know?" murmured Dorian Gray, sipping some
pale-yellow wine from a delicate, gold-beaded bubble of Venetian glass
and looking dreadfully bored.  "I was at the opera.  You should have
come on there.  I met Lady Gwendolen, Harry's sister, for the first
time.  We were in her box.  She is perfectly charming; and Patti sang
divinely.  Don't talk about horrid subjects.  If one doesn't talk about
a thing, it has never happened.  It is simply expression, as Harry
says, that gives reality to things.  I may mention that she was not the
woman's only child.  There is a son, a charming fellow, I believe.  But
he is not on the stage.  He is a sailor, or something.  And now, tell
me about yourself and what you are painting."

"You went to the opera?" said Hallward, speaking very slowly and with a
strained touch of pain in his voice.  "You went to the opera while
Sibyl Vane was lying dead in some sordid lodging?  You can talk to me
of other women being charming, and of Patti singing divinely, before
the girl you loved has even the quiet of a grave to sleep in?  Why,
man, there are horrors in store for that little white body of hers!"

"Stop, Basil!  I won't hear it!" cried Dorian, leaping to his feet.
"You must not tell me about things.  What is done is done.  What is
past is past."

"You call yesterday the past?"

"What has the actual lapse of time got to do with it?  It is only
shallow people who require years to get rid of an emotion.  A man who
is master of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can invent a
pleasure.  I don't want to be at the mercy of my emotions.  I want to
use them, to enjoy them, and to dominate them."

"Dorian, this is horrible!  Something has changed you completely.  You
look exactly the same wonderful boy who, day after day, used to come
down to my studio to sit for his picture.  But you were simple,
natural, and affectionate then.  You were the most unspoiled creature
in the whole world.  Now, I don't know what has come over you.  You
talk as if you had no heart, no pity in you.  It is all Harry's
influence.  I see that."

The lad flushed up and, going to the window, looked out for a few
moments on the green, flickering, sun-lashed garden.  "I owe a great
deal to Harry, Basil," he said at last, "more than I owe to you.  You
only taught me to be vain."

"Well, I am punished for that, Dorian--or shall be some day."

"I don't know what you mean, Basil," he exclaimed, turning round.  "I
don't know what you want.  What do you want?"

"I want the Dorian Gray I used to paint," said the artist sadly.

"Basil," said the lad, going over to him and putting his hand on his
shoulder, "you have come too late.  Yesterday, when I heard that Sibyl
Vane had killed herself--"

"Killed herself!  Good heavens! is there no doubt about that?" cried
Hallward, looking up at him with an expression of horror.

"My dear Basil!  Surely you don't think it was a vulgar accident?  Of
course she killed herself."

The elder man buried his face in his hands.  "How fearful," he
muttered, and a shudder ran through him.

"No," said Dorian Gray, "there is nothing fearful about it.  It is one
of the great romantic tragedies of the age.  As a rule, people who act
lead the most commonplace lives.  They are good husbands, or faithful
wives, or something tedious.  You know what I mean--middle-class virtue
and all that kind of thing.  How different Sibyl was!  She lived her
finest tragedy.  She was always a heroine.  The last night she
played--the night you saw her--she acted badly because she had known
the reality of love.  When she knew its unreality, she died, as Juliet
might have died.  She passed again into the sphere of art.  There is
something of the martyr about her.  Her death has all the pathetic
uselessness of martyrdom, all its wasted beauty.  But, as I was saying,
you must not think I have not suffered.  If you had come in yesterday
at a particular moment--about half-past five, perhaps, or a quarter to
six--you would have found me in tears.  Even Harry, who was here, who
brought me the news, in fact, had no idea what I was going through.  I
suffered immensely.  Then it passed away.  I cannot repeat an emotion.
No one can, except sentimentalists.  And you are awfully unjust, Basil.
You come down here to console me.  That is charming of you.  You find
me consoled, and you are furious.  How like a sympathetic person!  You
remind me of a story Harry told me about a certain philanthropist who
spent twenty years of his life in trying to get some grievance
redressed, or some unjust law altered--I forget exactly what it was.
Finally he succeeded, and nothing could exceed his disappointment.  He
had absolutely nothing to do, almost died of _ennui_, and became a
confirmed misanthrope.  And besides, my dear old Basil, if you really
want to console me, teach me rather to forget what has happened, or to
see it from a proper artistic point of view.  Was it not Gautier who
used to write about _la consolation des arts_?  I remember picking up a
little vellum-covered book in your studio one day and chancing on that
delightful phrase.  Well, I am not like that young man you told me of
when we were down at Marlow together, the young man who used to say
that yellow satin could console one for all the miseries of life.  I
love beautiful things that one can touch and handle.  Old brocades,
green bronzes, lacquer-work, carved ivories, exquisite surroundings,
luxury, pomp--there is much to be got from all these.  But the artistic
temperament that they create, or at any rate reveal, is still more to
me.  To become the spectator of one's own life, as Harry says, is to
escape the suffering of life.  I know you are surprised at my talking
to you like this.  You have not realized how I have developed.  I was a
schoolboy when you knew me.  I am a man now.  I have new passions, new
thoughts, new ideas.  I am different, but you must not like me less.  I
am changed, but you must always be my friend.  Of course, I am very
fond of Harry.  But I know that you are better than he is.  You are not
stronger--you are too much afraid of life--but you are better.  And how
happy we used to be together!  Don't leave me, Basil, and don't quarrel
with me.  I am what I am.  There is nothing more to be said."

The painter felt strangely moved.  The lad was infinitely dear to him,
and his personality had been the great turning point in his art.  He
could not bear the idea of reproaching him any more.  After all, his
indifference was probably merely a mood that would pass away.  There
was so much in him that was good, so much in him that was noble.

"Well, Dorian," he said at length, with a sad smile, "I won't speak to
you again about this horrible thing, after to-day.  I only trust your
name won't be mentioned in connection with it.  The inquest is to take
place this afternoon.  Have they summoned you?"

Dorian shook his head, and a look of annoyance passed over his face at
the mention of the word "inquest."  There was something so crude and
vulgar about everything of the kind.  "They don't know my name," he
answered.

"But surely she did?"

"Only my Christian name, and that I am quite sure she never mentioned
to any one.  She told me once that they were all rather curious to
learn who I was, and that she invariably told them my name was Prince
Charming.  It was pretty of her.  You must do me a drawing of Sibyl,
Basil.  I should like to have something more of her than the memory of
a few kisses and some broken pathetic words."

"I will try and do something, Dorian, if it would please you.  But you
must come and sit to me yourself again.  I can't get on without you."

"I can never sit to you again, Basil.  It is impossible!" he exclaimed,
starting back.

The painter stared at him.  "My dear boy, what nonsense!" he cried.
"Do you mean to say you don't like what I did of you?  Where is it?
Why have you pulled the screen in front of it?  Let me look at it.  It
is the best thing I have ever done.  Do take the screen away, Dorian.
It is simply disgraceful of your servant hiding my work like that.  I
felt the room looked different as I came in."

"My servant has nothing to do with it, Basil.  You don't imagine I let
him arrange my room for me?  He settles my flowers for me
sometimes--that is all.  No; I did it myself.  The light was too strong
on the portrait."

"Too strong!  Surely not, my dear fellow?  It is an admirable place for
it.  Let me see it."  And Hallward walked towards the corner of the
room.

A cry of terror broke from Dorian Gray's lips, and he rushed between
the painter and the screen.  "Basil," he said, looking very pale, "you
must not look at it.  I don't wish you to."

"Not look at my own work!  You are not serious.  Why shouldn't I look
at it?" exclaimed Hallward, laughing.

"If you try to look at it, Basil, on my word of honour I will never
speak to you again as long as I live.  I am quite serious.  I don't
offer any explanation, and you are not to ask for any.  But, remember,
if you touch this screen, everything is over between us."

Hallward was thunderstruck.  He looked at Dorian Gray in absolute
amazement.  He had never seen him like this before.  The lad was
actually pallid with rage.  His hands were clenched, and the pupils of
his eyes were like disks of blue fire.  He was trembling all over.

"Dorian!"

"Don't speak!"

"But what is the matter?  Of course I won't look at it if you don't
want me to," he said, rather coldly, turning on his heel and going over
towards the window.  "But, really, it seems rather absurd that I
shouldn't see my own work, especially as I am going to exhibit it in
Paris in the autumn.  I shall probably have to give it another coat of
varnish before that, so I must see it some day, and why not to-day?"

"To exhibit it!  You want to exhibit it?" exclaimed Dorian Gray, a
strange sense of terror creeping over him.  Was the world going to be
shown his secret?  Were people to gape at the mystery of his life?
That was impossible.  Something--he did not know what--had to be done
at once.

"Yes; I don't suppose you will object to that.  Georges Petit is going
to collect all my best pictures for a special exhibition in the Rue de
Seze, which will open the first week in October.  The portrait will
only be away a month.  I should think you could easily spare it for
that time.  In fact, you are sure to be out of town.  And if you keep
it always behind a screen, you can't care much about it."

Dorian Gray passed his hand over his forehead.  There were beads of
perspiration there.  He felt that he was on the brink of a horrible
danger.  "You told me a month ago that you would never exhibit it," he
cried.  "Why have you changed your mind?  You people who go in for
being consistent have just as many moods as others have.  The only
difference is that your moods are rather meaningless.  You can't have
forgotten that you assured me most solemnly that nothing in the world
would induce you to send it to any exhibition.  You told Harry exactly
the same thing." He stopped suddenly, and a gleam of light came into
his eyes.  He remembered that Lord Henry had said to him once, half
seriously and half in jest, "If you want to have a strange quarter of
an hour, get Basil to tell you why he won't exhibit your picture.  He
told me why he wouldn't, and it was a revelation to me."  Yes, perhaps
Basil, too, had his secret.  He would ask him and try.

"Basil," he said, coming over quite close and looking him straight in
the face, "we have each of us a secret.  Let me know yours, and I shall
tell you mine.  What was your reason for refusing to exhibit my
picture?"

The painter shuddered in spite of himself.  "Dorian, if I told you, you
might like me less than you do, and you would certainly laugh at me.  I
could not bear your doing either of those two things.  If you wish me
never to look at your picture again, I am content.  I have always you
to look at.  If you wish the best work I have ever done to be hidden
from the world, I am satisfied.  Your friendship is dearer to me than
any fame or reputation."

"No, Basil, you must tell me," insisted Dorian Gray.  "I think I have a
right to know."  His feeling of terror had passed away, and curiosity
had taken its place.  He was determined to find out Basil Hallward's
mystery.

"Let us sit down, Dorian," said the painter, looking troubled.  "Let us
sit down.  And just answer me one question.  Have you noticed in the
picture something curious?--something that probably at first did not
strike you, but that revealed itself to you suddenly?"

"Basil!" cried the lad, clutching the arms of his chair with trembling
hands and gazing at him with wild startled eyes.

"I see you did.  Don't speak.  Wait till you hear what I have to say.
Dorian, from the moment I met you, your personality had the most
extraordinary influence over me.  I was dominated, soul, brain, and
power, by you.  You became to me the visible incarnation of that unseen
ideal whose memory haunts us artists like an exquisite dream.  I
worshipped you.  I grew jealous of every one to whom you spoke.  I
wanted to have you all to myself.  I was only happy when I was with
you.  When you were away from me, you were still present in my art....
Of course, I never let you know anything about this.  It would have
been impossible.  You would not have understood it.  I hardly
understood it myself.  I only knew that I had seen perfection face to
face, and that the world had become wonderful to my eyes--too
wonderful, perhaps, for in such mad worships there is peril, the peril
of losing them, no less than the peril of keeping them....  Weeks and
weeks went on, and I grew more and more absorbed in you.  Then came a
new development.  I had drawn you as Paris in dainty armour, and as
Adonis with huntsman's cloak and polished boar-spear. Crowned with
heavy lotus-blossoms you had sat on the prow of Adrian's barge, gazing
across the green turbid Nile.  You had leaned over the still pool of
some Greek woodland and seen in the water's silent silver the marvel of
your own face.  And it had all been what art should be--unconscious,
ideal, and remote.  One day, a fatal day I sometimes think, I
determined to paint a wonderful portrait of you as you actually are,
not in the costume of dead ages, but in your own dress and in your own
time.  Whether it was the realism of the method, or the mere wonder of
your own personality, thus directly presented to me without mist or
veil, I cannot tell.  But I know that as I worked at it, every flake
and film of colour seemed to me to reveal my secret.  I grew afraid
that others would know of my idolatry.  I felt, Dorian, that I had told
too much, that I had put too much of myself into it.  Then it was that
I resolved never to allow the picture to be exhibited.  You were a
little annoyed; but then you did not realize all that it meant to me.
Harry, to whom I talked about it, laughed at me.  But I did not mind
that.  When the picture was finished, and I sat alone with it, I felt
that I was right.... Well, after a few days the thing left my studio,
and as soon as I had got rid of the intolerable fascination of its
presence, it seemed to me that I had been foolish in imagining that I
had seen anything in it, more than that you were extremely good-looking
and that I could paint.  Even now I cannot help feeling that it is a
mistake to think that the passion one feels in creation is ever really
shown in the work one creates.  Art is always more abstract than we
fancy.  Form and colour tell us of form and colour--that is all.  It
often seems to me that art conceals the artist far more completely than
it ever reveals him.  And so when I got this offer from Paris, I
determined to make your portrait the principal thing in my exhibition.
It never occurred to me that you would refuse.  I see now that you were
right.  The picture cannot be shown.  You must not be angry with me,
Dorian, for what I have told you.  As I said to Harry, once, you are
made to be worshipped."

Dorian Gray drew a long breath.  The colour came back to his cheeks,
and a smile played about his lips.  The peril was over.  He was safe
for the time.  Yet he could not help feeling infinite pity for the
painter who had just made this strange confession to him, and wondered
if he himself would ever be so dominated by the personality of a
friend.  Lord Henry had the charm of being very dangerous.  But that
was all.  He was too clever and too cynical to be really fond of.
Would there ever be some one who would fill him with a strange
idolatry?  Was that one of the things that life had in store?

"It is extraordinary to me, Dorian," said Hallward, "that you should
have seen this in the portrait.  Did you really see it?"

"I saw something in it," he answered, "something that seemed to me very
curious."

"Well, you don't mind my looking at the thing now?"

Dorian shook his head.  "You must not ask me that, Basil.  I could not
possibly let you stand in front of that picture."

"You will some day, surely?"

"Never."

"Well, perhaps you are right.  And now good-bye, Dorian.  You have been
the one person in my life who has really influenced my art.  Whatever I
have done that is good, I owe to you.  Ah! you don't know what it cost
me to tell you all that I have told you."

"My dear Basil," said Dorian, "what have you told me?  Simply that you
felt that you admired me too much.  That is not even a compliment."

"It was not intended as a compliment.  It was a confession.  Now that I
have made it, something seems to have gone out of me.  Perhaps one
should never put one's worship into words."

"It was a very disappointing confession."

"Why, what did you expect, Dorian?  You didn't see anything else in the
picture, did you?  There was nothing else to see?"

"No; there was nothing else to see.  Why do you ask?  But you mustn't
talk about worship.  It is foolish.  You and I are friends, Basil, and
we must always remain so."

"You have got Harry," said the painter sadly.

"Oh, Harry!" cried the lad, with a ripple of laughter.  "Harry spends
his days in saying what is incredible and his evenings in doing what is
improbable.  Just the sort of life I would like to lead.  But still I
don't think I would go to Harry if I were in trouble.  I would sooner
go to you, Basil."

"You will sit to me again?"

"Impossible!"

"You spoil my life as an artist by refusing, Dorian.  No man comes
across two ideal things.  Few come across one."

"I can't explain it to you, Basil, but I must never sit to you again.
There is something fatal about a portrait.  It has a life of its own.
I will come and have tea with you.  That will be just as pleasant."

"Pleasanter for you, I am afraid," murmured Hallward regretfully.  "And
now good-bye. I am sorry you won't let me look at the picture once
again.  But that can't be helped.  I quite understand what you feel
about it."

As he left the room, Dorian Gray smiled to himself.  Poor Basil!  How
little he knew of the true reason!  And how strange it was that,
instead of having been forced to reveal his own secret, he had
succeeded, almost by chance, in wresting a secret from his friend!  How
much that strange confession explained to him!  The painter's absurd
fits of jealousy, his wild devotion, his extravagant panegyrics, his
curious reticences--he understood them all now, and he felt sorry.
There seemed to him to be something tragic in a friendship so coloured
by romance.

He sighed and touched the bell.  The portrait must be hidden away at
all costs.  He could not run such a risk of discovery again.  It had
been mad of him to have allowed the thing to remain, even for an hour,
in a room to which any of his friends had access.



CHAPTER 10

When his servant entered, he looked at him steadfastly and wondered if
he had thought of peering behind the screen.  The man was quite
impassive and waited for his orders.  Dorian lit a cigarette and walked
over to the glass and glanced into it.  He could see the reflection of
Victor's face perfectly.  It was like a placid mask of servility.
There was nothing to be afraid of, there.  Yet he thought it best to be
on his guard.

Speaking very slowly, he told him to tell the house-keeper that he
wanted to see her, and then to go to the frame-maker and ask him to
send two of his men round at once.  It seemed to him that as the man
left the room his eyes wandered in the direction of the screen.  Or was
that merely his own fancy?

After a few moments, in her black silk dress, with old-fashioned thread
mittens on her wrinkled hands, Mrs. Leaf bustled into the library.  He
asked her for the key of the schoolroom.

"The old schoolroom, Mr. Dorian?" she exclaimed.  "Why, it is full of
dust.  I must get it arranged and put straight before you go into it.
It is not fit for you to see, sir.  It is not, indeed."

"I don't want it put straight, Leaf.  I only want the key."

"Well, sir, you'll be covered with cobwebs if you go into it.  Why, it
hasn't been opened for nearly five years--not since his lordship died."

He winced at the mention of his grandfather.  He had hateful memories
of him.  "That does not matter," he answered.  "I simply want to see
the place--that is all.  Give me the key."

"And here is the key, sir," said the old lady, going over the contents
of her bunch with tremulously uncertain hands.  "Here is the key.  I'll
have it off the bunch in a moment.  But you don't think of living up
there, sir, and you so comfortable here?"

"No, no," he cried petulantly.  "Thank you, Leaf.  That will do."

She lingered for a few moments, and was garrulous over some detail of
the household.  He sighed and told her to manage things as she thought
best.  She left the room, wreathed in smiles.

As the door closed, Dorian put the key in his pocket and looked round
the room.  His eye fell on a large, purple satin coverlet heavily
embroidered with gold, a splendid piece of late seventeenth-century
Venetian work that his grandfather had found in a convent near Bologna.
Yes, that would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in.  It had perhaps
served often as a pall for the dead.  Now it was to hide something that
had a corruption of its own, worse than the corruption of death
itself--something that would breed horrors and yet would never die.
What the worm was to the corpse, his sins would be to the painted image
on the canvas.  They would mar its beauty and eat away its grace.  They
would defile it and make it shameful.  And yet the thing would still
live on.  It would be always alive.

He shuddered, and for a moment he regretted that he had not told Basil
the true reason why he had wished to hide the picture away.  Basil
would have helped him to resist Lord Henry's influence, and the still
more poisonous influences that came from his own temperament.  The love
that he bore him--for it was really love--had nothing in it that was
not noble and intellectual.  It was not that mere physical admiration
of beauty that is born of the senses and that dies when the senses
tire.  It was such love as Michelangelo had known, and Montaigne, and
Winckelmann, and Shakespeare himself.  Yes, Basil could have saved him.
But it was too late now.  The past could always be annihilated.
Regret, denial, or forgetfulness could do that.  But the future was
inevitable.  There were passions in him that would find their terrible
outlet, dreams that would make the shadow of their evil real.

He took up from the couch the great purple-and-gold texture that
covered it, and, holding it in his hands, passed behind the screen.
Was the face on the canvas viler than before?  It seemed to him that it
was unchanged, and yet his loathing of it was intensified.  Gold hair,
blue eyes, and rose-red lips--they all were there.  It was simply the
expression that had altered.  That was horrible in its cruelty.
Compared to what he saw in it of censure or rebuke, how shallow Basil's
reproaches about Sibyl Vane had been!--how shallow, and of what little
account!  His own soul was looking out at him from the canvas and
calling him to judgement.  A look of pain came across him, and he flung
the rich pall over the picture.  As he did so, a knock came to the
door.  He passed out as his servant entered.

"The persons are here, Monsieur."

He felt that the man must be got rid of at once.  He must not be
allowed to know where the picture was being taken to.  There was
something sly about him, and he had thoughtful, treacherous eyes.
Sitting down at the writing-table he scribbled a note to Lord Henry,
asking him to send him round something to read and reminding him that
they were to meet at eight-fifteen that evening.

"Wait for an answer," he said, handing it to him, "and show the men in
here."

In two or three minutes there was another knock, and Mr. Hubbard
himself, the celebrated frame-maker of South Audley Street, came in
with a somewhat rough-looking young assistant.  Mr. Hubbard was a
florid, red-whiskered little man, whose admiration for art was
considerably tempered by the inveterate impecuniosity of most of the
artists who dealt with him.  As a rule, he never left his shop.  He
waited for people to come to him.  But he always made an exception in
favour of Dorian Gray.  There was something about Dorian that charmed
everybody.  It was a pleasure even to see him.

"What can I do for you, Mr. Gray?" he said, rubbing his fat freckled
hands.  "I thought I would do myself the honour of coming round in
person.  I have just got a beauty of a frame, sir.  Picked it up at a
sale.  Old Florentine.  Came from Fonthill, I believe.  Admirably
suited for a religious subject, Mr. Gray."

"I am so sorry you have given yourself the trouble of coming round, Mr.
Hubbard.  I shall certainly drop in and look at the frame--though I
don't go in much at present for religious art--but to-day I only want a
picture carried to the top of the house for me.  It is rather heavy, so
I thought I would ask you to lend me a couple of your men."

"No trouble at all, Mr. Gray.  I am delighted to be of any service to
you.  Which is the work of art, sir?"

"This," replied Dorian, moving the screen back.  "Can you move it,
covering and all, just as it is?  I don't want it to get scratched
going upstairs."

"There will be no difficulty, sir," said the genial frame-maker,
beginning, with the aid of his assistant, to unhook the picture from
the long brass chains by which it was suspended.  "And, now, where
shall we carry it to, Mr. Gray?"

"I will show you the way, Mr. Hubbard, if you will kindly follow me.
Or perhaps you had better go in front.  I am afraid it is right at the
top of the house.  We will go up by the front staircase, as it is
wider."

He held the door open for them, and they passed out into the hall and
began the ascent.  The elaborate character of the frame had made the
picture extremely bulky, and now and then, in spite of the obsequious
protests of Mr. Hubbard, who had the true tradesman's spirited dislike
of seeing a gentleman doing anything useful, Dorian put his hand to it
so as to help them.

"Something of a load to carry, sir," gasped the little man when they
reached the top landing.  And he wiped his shiny forehead.

"I am afraid it is rather heavy," murmured Dorian as he unlocked the
door that opened into the room that was to keep for him the curious
secret of his life and hide his soul from the eyes of men.

He had not entered the place for more than four years--not, indeed,
since he had used it first as a play-room when he was a child, and then
as a study when he grew somewhat older.  It was a large,
well-proportioned room, which had been specially built by the last Lord
Kelso for the use of the little grandson whom, for his strange likeness
to his mother, and also for other reasons, he had always hated and
desired to keep at a distance.  It appeared to Dorian to have but
little changed.  There was the huge Italian _cassone_, with its
fantastically painted panels and its tarnished gilt mouldings, in which
he had so often hidden himself as a boy.  There the satinwood book-case
filled with his dog-eared schoolbooks.  On the wall behind it was
hanging the same ragged Flemish tapestry where a faded king and queen
were playing chess in a garden, while a company of hawkers rode by,
carrying hooded birds on their gauntleted wrists.  How well he
remembered it all!  Every moment of his lonely childhood came back to
him as he looked round.  He recalled the stainless purity of his boyish
life, and it seemed horrible to him that it was here the fatal portrait
was to be hidden away.  How little he had thought, in those dead days,
of all that was in store for him!

But there was no other place in the house so secure from prying eyes as
this.  He had the key, and no one else could enter it.  Beneath its
purple pall, the face painted on the canvas could grow bestial, sodden,
and unclean.  What did it matter?  No one could see it.  He himself
would not see it.  Why should he watch the hideous corruption of his
soul?  He kept his youth--that was enough.  And, besides, might not
his nature grow finer, after all?  There was no reason that the future
should be so full of shame.  Some love might come across his life, and
purify him, and shield him from those sins that seemed to be already
stirring in spirit and in flesh--those curious unpictured sins whose
very mystery lent them their subtlety and their charm.  Perhaps, some
day, the cruel look would have passed away from the scarlet sensitive
mouth, and he might show to the world Basil Hallward's masterpiece.

No; that was impossible.  Hour by hour, and week by week, the thing
upon the canvas was growing old.  It might escape the hideousness of
sin, but the hideousness of age was in store for it.  The cheeks would
become hollow or flaccid.  Yellow crow's feet would creep round the
fading eyes and make them horrible.  The hair would lose its
brightness, the mouth would gape or droop, would be foolish or gross,
as the mouths of old men are.  There would be the wrinkled throat, the
cold, blue-veined hands, the twisted body, that he remembered in the
grandfather who had been so stern to him in his boyhood.  The picture
had to be concealed.  There was no help for it.

"Bring it in, Mr. Hubbard, please," he said, wearily, turning round.
"I am sorry I kept you so long.  I was thinking of something else."

"Always glad to have a rest, Mr. Gray," answered the frame-maker, who
was still gasping for breath.  "Where shall we put it, sir?"

"Oh, anywhere.  Here:  this will do.  I don't want to have it hung up.
Just lean it against the wall.  Thanks."

"Might one look at the work of art, sir?"

Dorian started.  "It would not interest you, Mr. Hubbard," he said,
keeping his eye on the man.  He felt ready to leap upon him and fling
him to the ground if he dared to lift the gorgeous hanging that
concealed the secret of his life.  "I shan't trouble you any more now.
I am much obliged for your kindness in coming round."

"Not at all, not at all, Mr. Gray.  Ever ready to do anything for you,
sir." And Mr. Hubbard tramped downstairs, followed by the assistant,
who glanced back at Dorian with a look of shy wonder in his rough
uncomely face.  He had never seen any one so marvellous.

When the sound of their footsteps had died away, Dorian locked the door
and put the key in his pocket.  He felt safe now.  No one would ever
look upon the horrible thing.  No eye but his would ever see his shame.

On reaching the library, he found that it was just after five o'clock
and that the tea had been already brought up.  On a little table of
dark perfumed wood thickly incrusted with nacre, a present from Lady
Radley, his guardian's wife, a pretty professional invalid who had
spent the preceding winter in Cairo, was lying a note from Lord Henry,
and beside it was a book bound in yellow paper, the cover slightly torn
and the edges soiled.  A copy of the third edition of _The St. James's
Gazette_ had been placed on the tea-tray. It was evident that Victor had
returned.  He wondered if he had met the men in the hall as they were
leaving the house and had wormed out of them what they had been doing.
He would be sure to miss the picture--had no doubt missed it already,
while he had been laying the tea-things. The screen had not been set
back, and a blank space was visible on the wall.  Perhaps some night he
might find him creeping upstairs and trying to force the door of the
room.  It was a horrible thing to have a spy in one's house.  He had
heard of rich men who had been blackmailed all their lives by some
servant who had read a letter, or overheard a conversation, or picked
up a card with an address, or found beneath a pillow a withered flower
or a shred of crumpled lace.

He sighed, and having poured himself out some tea, opened Lord Henry's
note.  It was simply to say that he sent him round the evening paper,
and a book that might interest him, and that he would be at the club at
eight-fifteen. He opened _The St. James's_ languidly, and looked through
it.  A red pencil-mark on the fifth page caught his eye.  It drew
attention to the following paragraph:


INQUEST ON AN ACTRESS.--An inquest was held this morning at the Bell
Tavern, Hoxton Road, by Mr. Danby, the District Coroner, on the body of
Sibyl Vane, a young actress recently engaged at the Royal Theatre,
Holborn.  A verdict of death by misadventure was returned.
Considerable sympathy was expressed for the mother of the deceased, who
was greatly affected during the giving of her own evidence, and that of
Dr. Birrell, who had made the post-mortem examination of the deceased.


He frowned, and tearing the paper in two, went across the room and
flung the pieces away.  How ugly it all was!  And how horribly real
ugliness made things!  He felt a little annoyed with Lord Henry for
having sent him the report.  And it was certainly stupid of him to have
marked it with red pencil.  Victor might have read it.  The man knew
more than enough English for that.

Perhaps he had read it and had begun to suspect something.  And, yet,
what did it matter?  What had Dorian Gray to do with Sibyl Vane's
death?  There was nothing to fear.  Dorian Gray had not killed her.

His eye fell on the yellow book that Lord Henry had sent him.  What was
it, he wondered.  He went towards the little, pearl-coloured octagonal
stand that had always looked to him like the work of some strange
Egyptian bees that wrought in silver, and taking up the volume, flung
himself into an arm-chair and began to turn over the leaves.  After a
few minutes he became absorbed.  It was the strangest book that he had
ever read.  It seemed to him that in exquisite raiment, and to the
delicate sound of flutes, the sins of the world were passing in dumb
show before him.  Things that he had dimly dreamed of were suddenly
made real to him.  Things of which he had never dreamed were gradually
revealed.

It was a novel without a plot and with only one character, being,
indeed, simply a psychological study of a certain young Parisian who
spent his life trying to realize in the nineteenth century all the
passions and modes of thought that belonged to every century except his
own, and to sum up, as it were, in himself the various moods through
which the world-spirit had ever passed, loving for their mere
artificiality those renunciations that men have unwisely called virtue,
as much as those natural rebellions that wise men still call sin.  The
style in which it was written was that curious jewelled style, vivid
and obscure at once, full of _argot_ and of archaisms, of technical
expressions and of elaborate paraphrases, that characterizes the work
of some of the finest artists of the French school of _Symbolistes_.
There were in it metaphors as monstrous as orchids and as subtle in
colour.  The life of the senses was described in the terms of mystical
philosophy.  One hardly knew at times whether one was reading the
spiritual ecstasies of some mediaeval saint or the morbid confessions
of a modern sinner.  It was a poisonous book.  The heavy odour of
incense seemed to cling about its pages and to trouble the brain.  The
mere cadence of the sentences, the subtle monotony of their music, so
full as it was of complex refrains and movements elaborately repeated,
produced in the mind of the lad, as he passed from chapter to chapter,
a form of reverie, a malady of dreaming, that made him unconscious of
the falling day and creeping shadows.

Cloudless, and pierced by one solitary star, a copper-green sky gleamed
through the windows.  He read on by its wan light till he could read no
more.  Then, after his valet had reminded him several times of the
lateness of the hour, he got up, and going into the next room, placed
the book on the little Florentine table that always stood at his
bedside and began to dress for dinner.

It was almost nine o'clock before he reached the club, where he found
Lord Henry sitting alone, in the morning-room, looking very much bored.

"I am so sorry, Harry," he cried, "but really it is entirely your
fault.  That book you sent me so fascinated me that I forgot how the
time was going."

"Yes, I thought you would like it," replied his host, rising from his
chair.

"I didn't say I liked it, Harry.  I said it fascinated me.  There is a
great difference."

"Ah, you have discovered that?" murmured Lord Henry.  And they passed
into the dining-room.



CHAPTER 11

For years, Dorian Gray could not free himself from the influence of
this book.  Or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that he never
sought to free himself from it.  He procured from Paris no less than
nine large-paper copies of the first edition, and had them bound in
different colours, so that they might suit his various moods and the
changing fancies of a nature over which he seemed, at times, to have
almost entirely lost control.  The hero, the wonderful young Parisian
in whom the romantic and the scientific temperaments were so strangely
blended, became to him a kind of prefiguring type of himself.  And,
indeed, the whole book seemed to him to contain the story of his own
life, written before he had lived it.

In one point he was more fortunate than the novel's fantastic hero.  He
never knew--never, indeed, had any cause to know--that somewhat
grotesque dread of mirrors, and polished metal surfaces, and still
water which came upon the young Parisian so early in his life, and was
occasioned by the sudden decay of a beau that had once, apparently,
been so remarkable.  It was with an almost cruel joy--and perhaps in
nearly every joy, as certainly in every pleasure, cruelty has its
place--that he used to read the latter part of the book, with its
really tragic, if somewhat overemphasized, account of the sorrow and
despair of one who had himself lost what in others, and the world, he
had most dearly valued.

For the wonderful beauty that had so fascinated Basil Hallward, and
many others besides him, seemed never to leave him.  Even those who had
heard the most evil things against him--and from time to time strange
rumours about his mode of life crept through London and became the
chatter of the clubs--could not believe anything to his dishonour when
they saw him.  He had always the look of one who had kept himself
unspotted from the world.  Men who talked grossly became silent when
Dorian Gray entered the room.  There was something in the purity of his
face that rebuked them.  His mere presence seemed to recall to them the
memory of the innocence that they had tarnished.  They wondered how one
so charming and graceful as he was could have escaped the stain of an
age that was at once sordid and sensual.

Often, on returning home from one of those mysterious and prolonged
absences that gave rise to such strange conjecture among those who were
his friends, or thought that they were so, he himself would creep
upstairs to the locked room, open the door with the key that never left
him now, and stand, with a mirror, in front of the portrait that Basil
Hallward had painted of him, looking now at the evil and aging face on
the canvas, and now at the fair young face that laughed back at him
from the polished glass.  The very sharpness of the contrast used to
quicken his sense of pleasure.  He grew more and more enamoured of his
own beauty, more and more interested in the corruption of his own soul.
He would examine with minute care, and sometimes with a monstrous and
terrible delight, the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling forehead
or crawled around the heavy sensual mouth, wondering sometimes which
were the more horrible, the signs of sin or the signs of age.  He would
place his white hands beside the coarse bloated hands of the picture,
and smile.  He mocked the misshapen body and the failing limbs.

There were moments, indeed, at night, when, lying sleepless in his own
delicately scented chamber, or in the sordid room of the little
ill-famed tavern near the docks which, under an assumed name and in
disguise, it was his habit to frequent, he would think of the ruin he
had brought upon his soul with a pity that was all the more poignant
because it was purely selfish.  But moments such as these were rare.
That curiosity about life which Lord Henry had first stirred in him, as
they sat together in the garden of their friend, seemed to increase
with gratification.  The more he knew, the more he desired to know.  He
had mad hungers that grew more ravenous as he fed them.

Yet he was not really reckless, at any rate in his relations to
society.  Once or twice every month during the winter, and on each
Wednesday evening while the season lasted, he would throw open to the
world his beautiful house and have the most celebrated musicians of the
day to charm his guests with the wonders of their art.  His little
dinners, in the settling of which Lord Henry always assisted him, were
noted as much for the careful selection and placing of those invited,
as for the exquisite taste shown in the decoration of the table, with
its subtle symphonic arrangements of exotic flowers, and embroidered
cloths, and antique plate of gold and silver.  Indeed, there were many,
especially among the very young men, who saw, or fancied that they saw,
in Dorian Gray the true realization of a type of which they had often
dreamed in Eton or Oxford days, a type that was to combine something of
the real culture of the scholar with all the grace and distinction and
perfect manner of a citizen of the world.  To them he seemed to be of
the company of those whom Dante describes as having sought to "make
themselves perfect by the worship of beauty."  Like Gautier, he was one
for whom "the visible world existed."

And, certainly, to him life itself was the first, the greatest, of the
arts, and for it all the other arts seemed to be but a preparation.
Fashion, by which what is really fantastic becomes for a moment
universal, and dandyism, which, in its own way, is an attempt to assert
the absolute modernity of beauty, had, of course, their fascination for
him.  His mode of dressing, and the particular styles that from time to
time he affected, had their marked influence on the young exquisites of
the Mayfair balls and Pall Mall club windows, who copied him in
everything that he did, and tried to reproduce the accidental charm of
his graceful, though to him only half-serious, fopperies.

For, while he was but too ready to accept the position that was almost
immediately offered to him on his coming of age, and found, indeed, a
subtle pleasure in the thought that he might really become to the
London of his own day what to imperial Neronian Rome the author of the
Satyricon once had been, yet in his inmost heart he desired to be
something more than a mere _arbiter elegantiarum_, to be consulted on the
wearing of a jewel, or the knotting of a necktie, or the conduct of a
cane.  He sought to elaborate some new scheme of life that would have
its reasoned philosophy and its ordered principles, and find in the
spiritualizing of the senses its highest realization.

The worship of the senses has often, and with much justice, been
decried, men feeling a natural instinct of terror about passions and
sensations that seem stronger than themselves, and that they are
conscious of sharing with the less highly organized forms of existence.
But it appeared to Dorian Gray that the true nature of the senses had
never been understood, and that they had remained savage and animal
merely because the world had sought to starve them into submission or
to kill them by pain, instead of aiming at making them elements of a
new spirituality, of which a fine instinct for beauty was to be the
dominant characteristic.  As he looked back upon man moving through
history, he was haunted by a feeling of loss.  So much had been
surrendered! and to such little purpose!  There had been mad wilful
rejections, monstrous forms of self-torture and self-denial, whose
origin was fear and whose result was a degradation infinitely more
terrible than that fancied degradation from which, in their ignorance,
they had sought to escape; Nature, in her wonderful irony, driving out
the anchorite to feed with the wild animals of the desert and giving to
the hermit the beasts of the field as his companions.

Yes:  there was to be, as Lord Henry had prophesied, a new Hedonism
that was to recreate life and to save it from that harsh uncomely
puritanism that is having, in our own day, its curious revival.  It was
to have its service of the intellect, certainly, yet it was never to
accept any theory or system that would involve the sacrifice of any
mode of passionate experience.  Its aim, indeed, was to be experience
itself, and not the fruits of experience, sweet or bitter as they might
be.  Of the asceticism that deadens the senses, as of the vulgar
profligacy that dulls them, it was to know nothing.  But it was to
teach man to concentrate himself upon the moments of a life that is
itself but a moment.

There are few of us who have not sometimes wakened before dawn, either
after one of those dreamless nights that make us almost enamoured of
death, or one of those nights of horror and misshapen joy, when through
the chambers of the brain sweep phantoms more terrible than reality
itself, and instinct with that vivid life that lurks in all grotesques,
and that lends to Gothic art its enduring vitality, this art being, one
might fancy, especially the art of those whose minds have been troubled
with the malady of reverie.  Gradually white fingers creep through the
curtains, and they appear to tremble.  In black fantastic shapes, dumb
shadows crawl into the corners of the room and crouch there.  Outside,
there is the stirring of birds among the leaves, or the sound of men
going forth to their work, or the sigh and sob of the wind coming down
from the hills and wandering round the silent house, as though it
feared to wake the sleepers and yet must needs call forth sleep from
her purple cave.  Veil after veil of thin dusky gauze is lifted, and by
degrees the forms and colours of things are restored to them, and we
watch the dawn remaking the world in its antique pattern.  The wan
mirrors get back their mimic life.  The flameless tapers stand where we
had left them, and beside them lies the half-cut book that we had been
studying, or the wired flower that we had worn at the ball, or the
letter that we had been afraid to read, or that we had read too often.
Nothing seems to us changed.  Out of the unreal shadows of the night
comes back the real life that we had known.  We have to resume it where
we had left off, and there steals over us a terrible sense of the
necessity for the continuance of energy in the same wearisome round of
stereotyped habits, or a wild longing, it may be, that our eyelids
might open some morning upon a world that had been refashioned anew in
the darkness for our pleasure, a world in which things would have fresh
shapes and colours, and be changed, or have other secrets, a world in
which the past would have little or no place, or survive, at any rate,
in no conscious form of obligation or regret, the remembrance even of
joy having its bitterness and the memories of pleasure their pain.

It was the creation of such worlds as these that seemed to Dorian Gray
to be the true object, or amongst the true objects, of life; and in his
search for sensations that would be at once new and delightful, and
possess that element of strangeness that is so essential to romance, he
would often adopt certain modes of thought that he knew to be really
alien to his nature, abandon himself to their subtle influences, and
then, having, as it were, caught their colour and satisfied his
intellectual curiosity, leave them with that curious indifference that
is not incompatible with a real ardour of temperament, and that,
indeed, according to certain modern psychologists, is often a condition
of it.

It was rumoured of him once that he was about to join the Roman
Catholic communion, and certainly the Roman ritual had always a great
attraction for him.  The daily sacrifice, more awful really than all
the sacrifices of the antique world, stirred him as much by its superb
rejection of the evidence of the senses as by the primitive simplicity
of its elements and the eternal pathos of the human tragedy that it
sought to symbolize.  He loved to kneel down on the cold marble
pavement and watch the priest, in his stiff flowered dalmatic, slowly
and with white hands moving aside the veil of the tabernacle, or
raising aloft the jewelled, lantern-shaped monstrance with that pallid
wafer that at times, one would fain think, is indeed the "_panis
caelestis_," the bread of angels, or, robed in the garments of the
Passion of Christ, breaking the Host into the chalice and smiting his
breast for his sins.  The fuming censers that the grave boys, in their
lace and scarlet, tossed into the air like great gilt flowers had their
subtle fascination for him.  As he passed out, he used to look with
wonder at the black confessionals and long to sit in the dim shadow of
one of them and listen to men and women whispering through the worn
grating the true story of their lives.

But he never fell into the error of arresting his intellectual
development by any formal acceptance of creed or system, or of
mistaking, for a house in which to live, an inn that is but suitable
for the sojourn of a night, or for a few hours of a night in which
there are no stars and the moon is in travail.  Mysticism, with its
marvellous power of making common things strange to us, and the subtle
antinomianism that always seems to accompany it, moved him for a
season; and for a season he inclined to the materialistic doctrines of
the _Darwinismus_ movement in Germany, and found a curious pleasure in
tracing the thoughts and passions of men to some pearly cell in the
brain, or some white nerve in the body, delighting in the conception of
the absolute dependence of the spirit on certain physical conditions,
morbid or healthy, normal or diseased.  Yet, as has been said of him
before, no theory of life seemed to him to be of any importance
compared with life itself.  He felt keenly conscious of how barren all
intellectual speculation is when separated from action and experiment.
He knew that the senses, no less than the soul, have their spiritual
mysteries to reveal.

And so he would now study perfumes and the secrets of their
manufacture, distilling heavily scented oils and burning odorous gums
from the East.  He saw that there was no mood of the mind that had not
its counterpart in the sensuous life, and set himself to discover their
true relations, wondering what there was in frankincense that made one
mystical, and in ambergris that stirred one's passions, and in violets
that woke the memory of dead romances, and in musk that troubled the
brain, and in champak that stained the imagination; and seeking often
to elaborate a real psychology of perfumes, and to estimate the several
influences of sweet-smelling roots and scented, pollen-laden flowers;
of aromatic balms and of dark and fragrant woods; of spikenard, that
sickens; of hovenia, that makes men mad; and of aloes, that are said to
be able to expel melancholy from the soul.

At another time he devoted himself entirely to music, and in a long
latticed room, with a vermilion-and-gold ceiling and walls of
olive-green lacquer, he used to give curious concerts in which mad
gipsies tore wild music from little zithers, or grave, yellow-shawled
Tunisians plucked at the strained strings of monstrous lutes, while
grinning Negroes beat monotonously upon copper drums and, crouching
upon scarlet mats, slim turbaned Indians blew through long pipes of
reed or brass and charmed--or feigned to charm--great hooded snakes and
horrible horned adders.  The harsh intervals and shrill discords of
barbaric music stirred him at times when Schubert's grace, and Chopin's
beautiful sorrows, and the mighty harmonies of Beethoven himself, fell
unheeded on his ear.  He collected together from all parts of the world
the strangest instruments that could be found, either in the tombs of
dead nations or among the few savage tribes that have survived contact
with Western civilizations, and loved to touch and try them.  He had
the mysterious _juruparis_ of the Rio Negro Indians, that women are not
allowed to look at and that even youths may not see till they have been
subjected to fasting and scourging, and the earthen jars of the
Peruvians that have the shrill cries of birds, and flutes of human
bones such as Alfonso de Ovalle heard in Chile, and the sonorous green
jaspers that are found near Cuzco and give forth a note of singular
sweetness.  He had painted gourds filled with pebbles that rattled when
they were shaken; the long _clarin_ of the Mexicans, into which the
performer does not blow, but through which he inhales the air; the
harsh _ture_ of the Amazon tribes, that is sounded by the sentinels who
sit all day long in high trees, and can be heard, it is said, at a
distance of three leagues; the _teponaztli_, that has two vibrating
tongues of wood and is beaten with sticks that are smeared with an
elastic gum obtained from the milky juice of plants; the _yotl_-bells of
the Aztecs, that are hung in clusters like grapes; and a huge
cylindrical drum, covered with the skins of great serpents, like the
one that Bernal Diaz saw when he went with Cortes into the Mexican
temple, and of whose doleful sound he has left us so vivid a
description.  The fantastic character of these instruments fascinated
him, and he felt a curious delight in the thought that art, like
Nature, has her monsters, things of bestial shape and with hideous
voices.  Yet, after some time, he wearied of them, and would sit in his
box at the opera, either alone or with Lord Henry, listening in rapt
pleasure to "Tannhauser" and seeing in the prelude to that great work
of art a presentation of the tragedy of his own soul.

On one occasion he took up the study of jewels, and appeared at a
costume ball as Anne de Joyeuse, Admiral of France, in a dress covered
with five hundred and sixty pearls.  This taste enthralled him for
years, and, indeed, may be said never to have left him.  He would often
spend a whole day settling and resettling in their cases the various
stones that he had collected, such as the olive-green chrysoberyl that
turns red by lamplight, the cymophane with its wirelike line of silver,
the pistachio-coloured peridot, rose-pink and wine-yellow topazes,
carbuncles of fiery scarlet with tremulous, four-rayed stars, flame-red
cinnamon-stones, orange and violet spinels, and amethysts with their
alternate layers of ruby and sapphire.  He loved the red gold of the
sunstone, and the moonstone's pearly whiteness, and the broken rainbow
of the milky opal.  He procured from Amsterdam three emeralds of
extraordinary size and richness of colour, and had a turquoise _de la
vieille roche_ that was the envy of all the connoisseurs.

He discovered wonderful stories, also, about jewels.  In Alphonso's
Clericalis Disciplina a serpent was mentioned with eyes of real
jacinth, and in the romantic history of Alexander, the Conqueror of
Emathia was said to have found in the vale of Jordan snakes "with
collars of real emeralds growing on their backs." There was a gem in
the brain of the dragon, Philostratus told us, and "by the exhibition
of golden letters and a scarlet robe" the monster could be thrown into
a magical sleep and slain.  According to the great alchemist, Pierre de
Boniface, the diamond rendered a man invisible, and the agate of India
made him eloquent.  The cornelian appeased anger, and the hyacinth
provoked sleep, and the amethyst drove away the fumes of wine.  The
garnet cast out demons, and the hydropicus deprived the moon of her
colour.  The selenite waxed and waned with the moon, and the meloceus,
that discovers thieves, could be affected only by the blood of kids.
Leonardus Camillus had seen a white stone taken from the brain of a
newly killed toad, that was a certain antidote against poison.  The
bezoar, that was found in the heart of the Arabian deer, was a charm
that could cure the plague.  In the nests of Arabian birds was the
aspilates, that, according to Democritus, kept the wearer from any
danger by fire.

The King of Ceilan rode through his city with a large ruby in his hand,
as the ceremony of his coronation.  The gates of the palace of John the
Priest were "made of sardius, with the horn of the horned snake
inwrought, so that no man might bring poison within." Over the gable
were "two golden apples, in which were two carbuncles," so that the
gold might shine by day and the carbuncles by night.  In Lodge's
strange romance 'A Margarite of America', it was stated that in the
chamber of the queen one could behold "all the chaste ladies of the
world, inchased out of silver, looking through fair mirrours of
chrysolites, carbuncles, sapphires, and greene emeraults." Marco Polo
had seen the inhabitants of Zipangu place rose-coloured pearls in the
mouths of the dead.  A sea-monster had been enamoured of the pearl that
the diver brought to King Perozes, and had slain the thief, and mourned
for seven moons over its loss.  When the Huns lured the king into the
great pit, he flung it away--Procopius tells the story--nor was it ever
found again, though the Emperor Anastasius offered five hundred-weight
of gold pieces for it.  The King of Malabar had shown to a certain
Venetian a rosary of three hundred and four pearls, one for every god
that he worshipped.

When the Duke de Valentinois, son of Alexander VI, visited Louis XII of
France, his horse was loaded with gold leaves, according to Brantome,
and his cap had double rows of rubies that threw out a great light.
Charles of England had ridden in stirrups hung with four hundred and
twenty-one diamonds.  Richard II had a coat, valued at thirty thousand
marks, which was covered with balas rubies.  Hall described Henry VIII,
on his way to the Tower previous to his coronation, as wearing "a
jacket of raised gold, the placard embroidered with diamonds and other
rich stones, and a great bauderike about his neck of large balasses."
The favourites of James I wore ear-rings of emeralds set in gold
filigrane.  Edward II gave to Piers Gaveston a suit of red-gold armour
studded with jacinths, a collar of gold roses set with
turquoise-stones, and a skull-cap _parseme_ with pearls.  Henry II wore
jewelled gloves reaching to the elbow, and had a hawk-glove sewn with
twelve rubies and fifty-two great orients.  The ducal hat of Charles
the Rash, the last Duke of Burgundy of his race, was hung with
pear-shaped pearls and studded with sapphires.

How exquisite life had once been!  How gorgeous in its pomp and
decoration!  Even to read of the luxury of the dead was wonderful.

Then he turned his attention to embroideries and to the tapestries that
performed the office of frescoes in the chill rooms of the northern
nations of Europe.  As he investigated the subject--and he always had
an extraordinary faculty of becoming absolutely absorbed for the moment
in whatever he took up--he was almost saddened by the reflection of the
ruin that time brought on beautiful and wonderful things.  He, at any
rate, had escaped that.  Summer followed summer, and the yellow
jonquils bloomed and died many times, and nights of horror repeated the
story of their shame, but he was unchanged.  No winter marred his face
or stained his flowerlike bloom.  How different it was with material
things!  Where had they passed to?  Where was the great crocus-coloured
robe, on which the gods fought against the giants, that had been worked
by brown girls for the pleasure of Athena?  Where the huge velarium
that Nero had stretched across the Colosseum at Rome, that Titan sail
of purple on which was represented the starry sky, and Apollo driving a
chariot drawn by white, gilt-reined steeds?  He longed to see the
curious table-napkins wrought for the Priest of the Sun, on which were
displayed all the dainties and viands that could be wanted for a feast;
the mortuary cloth of King Chilperic, with its three hundred golden
bees; the fantastic robes that excited the indignation of the Bishop of
Pontus and were figured with "lions, panthers, bears, dogs, forests,
rocks, hunters--all, in fact, that a painter can copy from nature"; and
the coat that Charles of Orleans once wore, on the sleeves of which
were embroidered the verses of a song beginning "_Madame, je suis tout
joyeux_," the musical accompaniment of the words being wrought in gold
thread, and each note, of square shape in those days, formed with four
pearls.  He read of the room that was prepared at the palace at Rheims
for the use of Queen Joan of Burgundy and was decorated with "thirteen
hundred and twenty-one parrots, made in broidery, and blazoned with the
king's arms, and five hundred and sixty-one butterflies, whose wings
were similarly ornamented with the arms of the queen, the whole worked
in gold."  Catherine de Medicis had a mourning-bed made for her of
black velvet powdered with crescents and suns.  Its curtains were of
damask, with leafy wreaths and garlands, figured upon a gold and silver
ground, and fringed along the edges with broideries of pearls, and it
stood in a room hung with rows of the queen's devices in cut black
velvet upon cloth of silver.  Louis XIV had gold embroidered caryatides
fifteen feet high in his apartment.  The state bed of Sobieski, King of
Poland, was made of Smyrna gold brocade embroidered in turquoises with
verses from the Koran.  Its supports were of silver gilt, beautifully
chased, and profusely set with enamelled and jewelled medallions.  It
had been taken from the Turkish camp before Vienna, and the standard of
Mohammed had stood beneath the tremulous gilt of its canopy.

And so, for a whole year, he sought to accumulate the most exquisite
specimens that he could find of textile and embroidered work, getting
the dainty Delhi muslins, finely wrought with gold-thread palmates and
stitched over with iridescent beetles' wings; the Dacca gauzes, that
from their transparency are known in the East as "woven air," and
"running water," and "evening dew"; strange figured cloths from Java;
elaborate yellow Chinese hangings; books bound in tawny satins or fair
blue silks and wrought with _fleurs-de-lis_, birds and images; veils of
_lacis_ worked in Hungary point; Sicilian brocades and stiff Spanish
velvets; Georgian work, with its gilt coins, and Japanese _Foukousas_,
with their green-toned golds and their marvellously plumaged birds.

He had a special passion, also, for ecclesiastical vestments, as indeed
he had for everything connected with the service of the Church.  In the
long cedar chests that lined the west gallery of his house, he had
stored away many rare and beautiful specimens of what is really the
raiment of the Bride of Christ, who must wear purple and jewels and
fine linen that she may hide the pallid macerated body that is worn by
the suffering that she seeks for and wounded by self-inflicted pain.
He possessed a gorgeous cope of crimson silk and gold-thread damask,
figured with a repeating pattern of golden pomegranates set in
six-petalled formal blossoms, beyond which on either side was the
pine-apple device wrought in seed-pearls. The orphreys were divided
into panels representing scenes from the life of the Virgin, and the
coronation of the Virgin was figured in coloured silks upon the hood.
This was Italian work of the fifteenth century.  Another cope was of
green velvet, embroidered with heart-shaped groups of acanthus-leaves,
from which spread long-stemmed white blossoms, the details of which
were picked out with silver thread and coloured crystals.  The morse
bore a seraph's head in gold-thread raised work.  The orphreys were
woven in a diaper of red and gold silk, and were starred with
medallions of many saints and martyrs, among whom was St. Sebastian.
He had chasubles, also, of amber-coloured silk, and blue silk and gold
brocade, and yellow silk damask and cloth of gold, figured with
representations of the Passion and Crucifixion of Christ, and
embroidered with lions and peacocks and other emblems; dalmatics of
white satin and pink silk damask, decorated with tulips and dolphins
and _fleurs-de-lis_; altar frontals of crimson velvet and blue linen; and
many corporals, chalice-veils, and sudaria.  In the mystic offices to
which such things were put, there was something that quickened his
imagination.

For these treasures, and everything that he collected in his lovely
house, were to be to him means of forgetfulness, modes by which he
could escape, for a season, from the fear that seemed to him at times
to be almost too great to be borne.  Upon the walls of the lonely
locked room where he had spent so much of his boyhood, he had hung with
his own hands the terrible portrait whose changing features showed him
the real degradation of his life, and in front of it had draped the
purple-and-gold pall as a curtain.  For weeks he would not go there,
would forget the hideous painted thing, and get back his light heart,
his wonderful joyousness, his passionate absorption in mere existence.
Then, suddenly, some night he would creep out of the house, go down to
dreadful places near Blue Gate Fields, and stay there, day after day,
until he was driven away.  On his return he would sit in front of the
picture, sometimes loathing it and himself, but filled, at other
times, with that pride of individualism that is half the
fascination of sin, and smiling with secret pleasure at the misshapen
shadow that had to bear the burden that should have been his own.

After a few years he could not endure to be long out of England, and
gave up the villa that he had shared at Trouville with Lord Henry, as
well as the little white walled-in house at Algiers where they had more
than once spent the winter.  He hated to be separated from the picture
that was such a part of his life, and was also afraid that during his
absence some one might gain access to the room, in spite of the
elaborate bars that he had caused to be placed upon the door.

He was quite conscious that this would tell them nothing.  It was true
that the portrait still preserved, under all the foulness and ugliness
of the face, its marked likeness to himself; but what could they learn
from that?  He would laugh at any one who tried to taunt him.  He had
not painted it.  What was it to him how vile and full of shame it
looked?  Even if he told them, would they believe it?

Yet he was afraid.  Sometimes when he was down at his great house in
Nottinghamshire, entertaining the fashionable young men of his own rank
who were his chief companions, and astounding the county by the wanton
luxury and gorgeous splendour of his mode of life, he would suddenly
leave his guests and rush back to town to see that the door had not
been tampered with and that the picture was still there.  What if it
should be stolen?  The mere thought made him cold with horror.  Surely
the world would know his secret then.  Perhaps the world already
suspected it.

For, while he fascinated many, there were not a few who distrusted him.
He was very nearly blackballed at a West End club of which his birth
and social position fully entitled him to become a member, and it was
said that on one occasion, when he was brought by a friend into the
smoking-room of the Churchill, the Duke of Berwick and another
gentleman got up in a marked manner and went out.  Curious stories
became current about him after he had passed his twenty-fifth year.  It
was rumoured that he had been seen brawling with foreign sailors in a
low den in the distant parts of Whitechapel, and that he consorted with
thieves and coiners and knew the mysteries of their trade.  His
extraordinary absences became notorious, and, when he used to reappear
again in society, men would whisper to each other in corners, or pass
him with a sneer, or look at him with cold searching eyes, as though
they were determined to discover his secret.

Of such insolences and attempted slights he, of course, took no notice,
and in the opinion of most people his frank debonair manner, his
charming boyish smile, and the infinite grace of that wonderful youth
that seemed never to leave him, were in themselves a sufficient answer
to the calumnies, for so they termed them, that were circulated about
him.  It was remarked, however, that some of those who had been most
intimate with him appeared, after a time, to shun him.  Women who had
wildly adored him, and for his sake had braved all social censure and
set convention at defiance, were seen to grow pallid with shame or
horror if Dorian Gray entered the room.

Yet these whispered scandals only increased in the eyes of many his
strange and dangerous charm.  His great wealth was a certain element of
security.  Society--civilized society, at least--is never very ready to
believe anything to the detriment of those who are both rich and
fascinating.  It feels instinctively that manners are of more
importance than morals, and, in its opinion, the highest respectability
is of much less value than the possession of a good _chef_.  And, after
all, it is a very poor consolation to be told that the man who has
given one a bad dinner, or poor wine, is irreproachable in his private
life.  Even the cardinal virtues cannot atone for half-cold _entrees_, as
Lord Henry remarked once, in a discussion on the subject, and there is
possibly a good deal to be said for his view.  For the canons of good
society are, or should be, the same as the canons of art.  Form is
absolutely essential to it.  It should have the dignity of a ceremony,
as well as its unreality, and should combine the insincere character of
a romantic play with the wit and beauty that make such plays delightful
to us.  Is insincerity such a terrible thing?  I think not.  It is
merely a method by which we can multiply our personalities.

Such, at any rate, was Dorian Gray's opinion.  He used to wonder at the
shallow psychology of those who conceive the ego in man as a thing
simple, permanent, reliable, and of one essence.  To him, man was a
being with myriad lives and myriad sensations, a complex multiform
creature that bore within itself strange legacies of thought and
passion, and whose very flesh was tainted with the monstrous maladies
of the dead.  He loved to stroll through the gaunt cold picture-gallery
of his country house and look at the various portraits of those whose
blood flowed in his veins.  Here was Philip Herbert, described by
Francis Osborne, in his Memoires on the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and
King James, as one who was "caressed by the Court for his handsome
face, which kept him not long company."  Was it young Herbert's life
that he sometimes led?  Had some strange poisonous germ crept from body
to body till it had reached his own?  Was it some dim sense of that
ruined grace that had made him so suddenly, and almost without cause,
give utterance, in Basil Hallward's studio, to the mad prayer that had
so changed his life?  Here, in gold-embroidered red doublet, jewelled
surcoat, and gilt-edged ruff and wristbands, stood Sir Anthony Sherard,
with his silver-and-black armour piled at his feet.  What had this
man's legacy been?  Had the lover of Giovanna of Naples bequeathed him
some inheritance of sin and shame?  Were his own actions merely the
dreams that the dead man had not dared to realize?  Here, from the
fading canvas, smiled Lady Elizabeth Devereux, in her gauze hood, pearl
stomacher, and pink slashed sleeves.  A flower was in her right hand,
and her left clasped an enamelled collar of white and damask roses.  On
a table by her side lay a mandolin and an apple.  There were large
green rosettes upon her little pointed shoes.  He knew her life, and
the strange stories that were told about her lovers.  Had he something
of her temperament in him?  These oval, heavy-lidded eyes seemed to
look curiously at him.  What of George Willoughby, with his powdered
hair and fantastic patches?  How evil he looked!  The face was
saturnine and swarthy, and the sensual lips seemed to be twisted with
disdain.  Delicate lace ruffles fell over the lean yellow hands that
were so overladen with rings.  He had been a macaroni of the eighteenth
century, and the friend, in his youth, of Lord Ferrars.  What of the
second Lord Beckenham, the companion of the Prince Regent in his
wildest days, and one of the witnesses at the secret marriage with Mrs.
Fitzherbert?  How proud and handsome he was, with his chestnut curls
and insolent pose!  What passions had he bequeathed?  The world had
looked upon him as infamous.  He had led the orgies at Carlton House.
The star of the Garter glittered upon his breast.  Beside him hung the
portrait of his wife, a pallid, thin-lipped woman in black.  Her blood,
also, stirred within him.  How curious it all seemed!  And his mother
with her Lady Hamilton face and her moist, wine-dashed lips--he knew
what he had got from her.  He had got from her his beauty, and his
passion for the beauty of others.  She laughed at him in her loose
Bacchante dress.  There were vine leaves in her hair.  The purple
spilled from the cup she was holding.  The carnations of the painting
had withered, but the eyes were still wonderful in their depth and
brilliancy of colour.  They seemed to follow him wherever he went.

Yet one had ancestors in literature as well as in one's own race,
nearer perhaps in type and temperament, many of them, and certainly
with an influence of which one was more absolutely conscious.  There
were times when it appeared to Dorian Gray that the whole of history
was merely the record of his own life, not as he had lived it in act
and circumstance, but as his imagination had created it for him, as it
had been in his brain and in his passions.  He felt that he had known
them all, those strange terrible figures that had passed across the
stage of the world and made sin so marvellous and evil so full of
subtlety.  It seemed to him that in some mysterious way their lives had
been his own.

The hero of the wonderful novel that had so influenced his life had
himself known this curious fancy.  In the seventh chapter he tells how,
crowned with laurel, lest lightning might strike him, he had sat, as
Tiberius, in a garden at Capri, reading the shameful books of
Elephantis, while dwarfs and peacocks strutted round him and the
flute-player mocked the swinger of the censer; and, as Caligula, had
caroused with the green-shirted jockeys in their stables and supped in
an ivory manger with a jewel-frontleted horse; and, as Domitian, had
wandered through a corridor lined with marble mirrors, looking round
with haggard eyes for the reflection of the dagger that was to end his
days, and sick with that ennui, that terrible _taedium vitae_, that comes
on those to whom life denies nothing; and had peered through a clear
emerald at the red shambles of the circus and then, in a litter of
pearl and purple drawn by silver-shod mules, been carried through the
Street of Pomegranates to a House of Gold and heard men cry on Nero
Caesar as he passed by; and, as Elagabalus, had painted his face with
colours, and plied the distaff among the women, and brought the Moon
from Carthage and given her in mystic marriage to the Sun.

Over and over again Dorian used to read this fantastic chapter, and the
two chapters immediately following, in which, as in some curious
tapestries or cunningly wrought enamels, were pictured the awful and
beautiful forms of those whom vice and blood and weariness had made
monstrous or mad:  Filippo, Duke of Milan, who slew his wife and
painted her lips with a scarlet poison that her lover might suck death
from the dead thing he fondled; Pietro Barbi, the Venetian, known as
Paul the Second, who sought in his vanity to assume the title of
Formosus, and whose tiara, valued at two hundred thousand florins, was
bought at the price of a terrible sin; Gian Maria Visconti, who used
hounds to chase living men and whose murdered body was covered with
roses by a harlot who had loved him; the Borgia on his white horse,
with Fratricide riding beside him and his mantle stained with the blood
of Perotto; Pietro Riario, the young Cardinal Archbishop of Florence,
child and minion of Sixtus IV, whose beauty was equalled only by his
debauchery, and who received Leonora of Aragon in a pavilion of white
and crimson silk, filled with nymphs and centaurs, and gilded a boy
that he might serve at the feast as Ganymede or Hylas; Ezzelin, whose
melancholy could be cured only by the spectacle of death, and who had a
passion for red blood, as other men have for red wine--the son of the
Fiend, as was reported, and one who had cheated his father at dice when
gambling with him for his own soul; Giambattista Cibo, who in mockery
took the name of Innocent and into whose torpid veins the blood of
three lads was infused by a Jewish doctor; Sigismondo Malatesta, the
lover of Isotta and the lord of Rimini, whose effigy was burned at Rome
as the enemy of God and man, who strangled Polyssena with a napkin, and
gave poison to Ginevra d'Este in a cup of emerald, and in honour of a
shameful passion built a pagan church for Christian worship; Charles
VI, who had so wildly adored his brother's wife that a leper had warned
him of the insanity that was coming on him, and who, when his brain had
sickened and grown strange, could only be soothed by Saracen cards
painted with the images of love and death and madness; and, in his
trimmed jerkin and jewelled cap and acanthuslike curls, Grifonetto
Baglioni, who slew Astorre with his bride, and Simonetto with his page,
and whose comeliness was such that, as he lay dying in the yellow
piazza of Perugia, those who had hated him could not choose but weep,
and Atalanta, who had cursed him, blessed him.

There was a horrible fascination in them all.  He saw them at night,
and they troubled his imagination in the day.  The Renaissance knew of
strange manners of poisoning--poisoning by a helmet and a lighted
torch, by an embroidered glove and a jewelled fan, by a gilded pomander
and by an amber chain.  Dorian Gray had been poisoned by a book.  There
were moments when he looked on evil simply as a mode through which he
could realize his conception of the beautiful.



CHAPTER 12

It was on the ninth of November, the eve of his own thirty-eighth
birthday, as he often remembered afterwards.

He was walking home about eleven o'clock from Lord Henry's, where he
had been dining, and was wrapped in heavy furs, as the night was cold
and foggy.  At the corner of Grosvenor Square and South Audley Street,
a man passed him in the mist, walking very fast and with the collar of
his grey ulster turned up.  He had a bag in his hand.  Dorian
recognized him.  It was Basil Hallward.  A strange sense of fear, for
which he could not account, came over him.  He made no sign of
recognition and went on quickly in the direction of his own house.

But Hallward had seen him.  Dorian heard him first stopping on the
pavement and then hurrying after him.  In a few moments, his hand was
on his arm.

"Dorian!  What an extraordinary piece of luck!  I have been waiting for
you in your library ever since nine o'clock. Finally I took pity on
your tired servant and told him to go to bed, as he let me out.  I am
off to Paris by the midnight train, and I particularly wanted to see
you before I left.  I thought it was you, or rather your fur coat, as
you passed me.  But I wasn't quite sure.  Didn't you recognize me?"

"In this fog, my dear Basil?  Why, I can't even recognize Grosvenor
Square.  I believe my house is somewhere about here, but I don't feel
at all certain about it.  I am sorry you are going away, as I have not
seen you for ages.  But I suppose you will be back soon?"

"No:  I am going to be out of England for six months.  I intend to take
a studio in Paris and shut myself up till I have finished a great
picture I have in my head.  However, it wasn't about myself I wanted to
talk.  Here we are at your door.  Let me come in for a moment.  I have
something to say to you."

"I shall be charmed.  But won't you miss your train?" said Dorian Gray
languidly as he passed up the steps and opened the door with his
latch-key.

The lamplight struggled out through the fog, and Hallward looked at his
watch.  "I have heaps of time," he answered.  "The train doesn't go
till twelve-fifteen, and it is only just eleven.  In fact, I was on my
way to the club to look for you, when I met you.  You see, I shan't
have any delay about luggage, as I have sent on my heavy things.  All I
have with me is in this bag, and I can easily get to Victoria in twenty
minutes."

Dorian looked at him and smiled.  "What a way for a fashionable painter
to travel!  A Gladstone bag and an ulster!  Come in, or the fog will
get into the house.  And mind you don't talk about anything serious.
Nothing is serious nowadays.  At least nothing should be."

Hallward shook his head, as he entered, and followed Dorian into the
library.  There was a bright wood fire blazing in the large open
hearth.  The lamps were lit, and an open Dutch silver spirit-case
stood, with some siphons of soda-water and large cut-glass tumblers, on
a little marqueterie table.

"You see your servant made me quite at home, Dorian.  He gave me
everything I wanted, including your best gold-tipped cigarettes.  He is
a most hospitable creature.  I like him much better than the Frenchman
you used to have.  What has become of the Frenchman, by the bye?"

Dorian shrugged his shoulders.  "I believe he married Lady Radley's
maid, and has established her in Paris as an English dressmaker.
Anglomania is very fashionable over there now, I hear.  It seems silly
of the French, doesn't it?  But--do you know?--he was not at all a bad
servant.  I never liked him, but I had nothing to complain about.  One
often imagines things that are quite absurd.  He was really very
devoted to me and seemed quite sorry when he went away.  Have another
brandy-and-soda? Or would you like hock-and-seltzer? I always take
hock-and-seltzer myself.  There is sure to be some in the next room."

"Thanks, I won't have anything more," said the painter, taking his cap
and coat off and throwing them on the bag that he had placed in the
corner.  "And now, my dear fellow, I want to speak to you seriously.
Don't frown like that.  You make it so much more difficult for me."

"What is it all about?" cried Dorian in his petulant way, flinging
himself down on the sofa.  "I hope it is not about myself.  I am tired
of myself to-night. I should like to be somebody else."

"It is about yourself," answered Hallward in his grave deep voice, "and
I must say it to you.  I shall only keep you half an hour."

Dorian sighed and lit a cigarette.  "Half an hour!" he murmured.

"It is not much to ask of you, Dorian, and it is entirely for your own
sake that I am speaking.  I think it right that you should know that
the most dreadful things are being said against you in London."

"I don't wish to know anything about them.  I love scandals about other
people, but scandals about myself don't interest me.  They have not got
the charm of novelty."

"They must interest you, Dorian.  Every gentleman is interested in his
good name.  You don't want people to talk of you as something vile and
degraded.  Of course, you have your position, and your wealth, and all
that kind of thing.  But position and wealth are not everything.  Mind
you, I don't believe these rumours at all.  At least, I can't believe
them when I see you.  Sin is a thing that writes itself across a man's
face.  It cannot be concealed.  People talk sometimes of secret vices.
There are no such things.  If a wretched man has a vice, it shows
itself in the lines of his mouth, the droop of his eyelids, the
moulding of his hands even.  Somebody--I won't mention his name, but
you know him--came to me last year to have his portrait done.  I had
never seen him before, and had never heard anything about him at the
time, though I have heard a good deal since.  He offered an extravagant
price.  I refused him.  There was something in the shape of his fingers
that I hated.  I know now that I was quite right in what I fancied
about him.  His life is dreadful.  But you, Dorian, with your pure,
bright, innocent face, and your marvellous untroubled youth--I can't
believe anything against you.  And yet I see you very seldom, and you
never come down to the studio now, and when I am away from you, and I
hear all these hideous things that people are whispering about you, I
don't know what to say.  Why is it, Dorian, that a man like the Duke of
Berwick leaves the room of a club when you enter it?  Why is it that so
many gentlemen in London will neither go to your house or invite you to
theirs?  You used to be a friend of Lord Staveley.  I met him at dinner
last week.  Your name happened to come up in conversation, in
connection with the miniatures you have lent to the exhibition at the
Dudley.  Staveley curled his lip and said that you might have the most
artistic tastes, but that you were a man whom no pure-minded girl
should be allowed to know, and whom no chaste woman should sit in the
same room with.  I reminded him that I was a friend of yours, and asked
him what he meant.  He told me.  He told me right out before everybody.
It was horrible!  Why is your friendship so fatal to young men?  There
was that wretched boy in the Guards who committed suicide.  You were
his great friend.  There was Sir Henry Ashton, who had to leave England
with a tarnished name.  You and he were inseparable.  What about Adrian
Singleton and his dreadful end?  What about Lord Kent's only son and
his career?  I met his father yesterday in St. James's Street.  He
seemed broken with shame and sorrow.  What about the young Duke of
Perth?  What sort of life has he got now?  What gentleman would
associate with him?"

"Stop, Basil.  You are talking about things of which you know nothing,"
said Dorian Gray, biting his lip, and with a note of infinite contempt
in his voice.  "You ask me why Berwick leaves a room when I enter it.
It is because I know everything about his life, not because he knows
anything about mine.  With such blood as he has in his veins, how could
his record be clean?  You ask me about Henry Ashton and young Perth.
Did I teach the one his vices, and the other his debauchery?  If Kent's
silly son takes his wife from the streets, what is that to me?  If
Adrian Singleton writes his friend's name across a bill, am I his
keeper?  I know how people chatter in England.  The middle classes air
their moral prejudices over their gross dinner-tables, and whisper
about what they call the profligacies of their betters in order to try
and pretend that they are in smart society and on intimate terms with
the people they slander.  In this country, it is enough for a man to
have distinction and brains for every common tongue to wag against him.
And what sort of lives do these people, who pose as being moral, lead
themselves?  My dear fellow, you forget that we are in the native land
of the hypocrite."

"Dorian," cried Hallward, "that is not the question.  England is bad
enough I know, and English society is all wrong.  That is the reason
why I want you to be fine.  You have not been fine.  One has a right to
judge of a man by the effect he has over his friends.  Yours seem to
lose all sense of honour, of goodness, of purity.  You have filled them
with a madness for pleasure.  They have gone down into the depths.  You
led them there.  Yes:  you led them there, and yet you can smile, as
you are smiling now.  And there is worse behind.  I know you and Harry
are inseparable.  Surely for that reason, if for none other, you should
not have made his sister's name a by-word."

"Take care, Basil.  You go too far."

"I must speak, and you must listen.  You shall listen.  When you met
Lady Gwendolen, not a breath of scandal had ever touched her.  Is there
a single decent woman in London now who would drive with her in the
park?  Why, even her children are not allowed to live with her.  Then
there are other stories--stories that you have been seen creeping at
dawn out of dreadful houses and slinking in disguise into the foulest
dens in London.  Are they true?  Can they be true?  When I first heard
them, I laughed.  I hear them now, and they make me shudder.  What
about your country-house and the life that is led there?  Dorian, you
don't know what is said about you.  I won't tell you that I don't want
to preach to you.  I remember Harry saying once that every man who
turned himself into an amateur curate for the moment always began by
saying that, and then proceeded to break his word.  I do want to preach
to you.  I want you to lead such a life as will make the world respect
you.  I want you to have a clean name and a fair record.  I want you to
get rid of the dreadful people you associate with.  Don't shrug your
shoulders like that.  Don't be so indifferent.  You have a wonderful
influence.  Let it be for good, not for evil.  They say that you
corrupt every one with whom you become intimate, and that it is quite
sufficient for you to enter a house for shame of some kind to follow
after.  I don't know whether it is so or not.  How should I know?  But
it is said of you.  I am told things that it seems impossible to doubt.
Lord Gloucester was one of my greatest friends at Oxford.  He showed me
a letter that his wife had written to him when she was dying alone in
her villa at Mentone.  Your name was implicated in the most terrible
confession I ever read.  I told him that it was absurd--that I knew you
thoroughly and that you were incapable of anything of the kind.  Know
you?  I wonder do I know you?  Before I could answer that, I should
have to see your soul."

"To see my soul!" muttered Dorian Gray, starting up from the sofa and
turning almost white from fear.

"Yes," answered Hallward gravely, and with deep-toned sorrow in his
voice, "to see your soul.  But only God can do that."

A bitter laugh of mockery broke from the lips of the younger man.  "You
shall see it yourself, to-night!" he cried, seizing a lamp from the
table.  "Come:  it is your own handiwork.  Why shouldn't you look at
it?  You can tell the world all about it afterwards, if you choose.
Nobody would believe you.  If they did believe you, they would like me
all the better for it.  I know the age better than you do, though you
will prate about it so tediously.  Come, I tell you.  You have
chattered enough about corruption.  Now you shall look on it face to
face."

There was the madness of pride in every word he uttered.  He stamped
his foot upon the ground in his boyish insolent manner.  He felt a
terrible joy at the thought that some one else was to share his secret,
and that the man who had painted the portrait that was the origin of
all his shame was to be burdened for the rest of his life with the
hideous memory of what he had done.

"Yes," he continued, coming closer to him and looking steadfastly into
his stern eyes, "I shall show you my soul.  You shall see the thing
that you fancy only God can see."

Hallward started back.  "This is blasphemy, Dorian!" he cried.  "You
must not say things like that.  They are horrible, and they don't mean
anything."

"You think so?"  He laughed again.

"I know so.  As for what I said to you to-night, I said it for your
good.  You know I have been always a stanch friend to you."

"Don't touch me.  Finish what you have to say."

A twisted flash of pain shot across the painter's face.  He paused for
a moment, and a wild feeling of pity came over him.  After all, what
right had he to pry into the life of Dorian Gray?  If he had done a
tithe of what was rumoured about him, how much he must have suffered!
Then he straightened himself up, and walked over to the fire-place, and
stood there, looking at the burning logs with their frostlike ashes and
their throbbing cores of flame.

"I am waiting, Basil," said the young man in a hard clear voice.

He turned round.  "What I have to say is this," he cried.  "You must
give me some answer to these horrible charges that are made against
you.  If you tell me that they are absolutely untrue from beginning to
end, I shall believe you.  Deny them, Dorian, deny them!  Can't you see
what I am going through?  My God! don't tell me that you are bad, and
corrupt, and shameful."

Dorian Gray smiled.  There was a curl of contempt in his lips.  "Come
upstairs, Basil," he said quietly.  "I keep a diary of my life from day
to day, and it never leaves the room in which it is written.  I shall
show it to you if you come with me."

"I shall come with you, Dorian, if you wish it.  I see I have missed my
train.  That makes no matter.  I can go to-morrow. But don't ask me to
read anything to-night. All I want is a plain answer to my question."

"That shall be given to you upstairs.  I could not give it here.  You
will not have to read long."



CHAPTER 13

He passed out of the room and began the ascent, Basil Hallward
following close behind.  They walked softly, as men do instinctively at
night.  The lamp cast fantastic shadows on the wall and staircase.  A
rising wind made some of the windows rattle.

When they reached the top landing, Dorian set the lamp down on the
floor, and taking out the key, turned it in the lock.  "You insist on
knowing, Basil?" he asked in a low voice.

"Yes."

"I am delighted," he answered, smiling.  Then he added, somewhat
harshly, "You are the one man in the world who is entitled to know
everything about me.  You have had more to do with my life than you
think"; and, taking up the lamp, he opened the door and went in.  A
cold current of air passed them, and the light shot up for a moment in
a flame of murky orange.  He shuddered.  "Shut the door behind you," he
whispered, as he placed the lamp on the table.

Hallward glanced round him with a puzzled expression.  The room looked
as if it had not been lived in for years.  A faded Flemish tapestry, a
curtained picture, an old Italian _cassone_, and an almost empty
book-case--that was all that it seemed to contain, besides a chair and
a table.  As Dorian Gray was lighting a half-burned candle that was
standing on the mantelshelf, he saw that the whole place was covered
with dust and that the carpet was in holes.  A mouse ran scuffling
behind the wainscoting.  There was a damp odour of mildew.

"So you think that it is only God who sees the soul, Basil?  Draw that
curtain back, and you will see mine."

The voice that spoke was cold and cruel.  "You are mad, Dorian, or
playing a part," muttered Hallward, frowning.

"You won't? Then I must do it myself," said the young man, and he tore
the curtain from its rod and flung it on the ground.

An exclamation of horror broke from the painter's lips as he saw in the
dim light the hideous face on the canvas grinning at him.  There was
something in its expression that filled him with disgust and loathing.
Good heavens! it was Dorian Gray's own face that he was looking at!
The horror, whatever it was, had not yet entirely spoiled that
marvellous beauty.  There was still some gold in the thinning hair and
some scarlet on the sensual mouth.  The sodden eyes had kept something
of the loveliness of their blue, the noble curves had not yet
completely passed away from chiselled nostrils and from plastic throat.
Yes, it was Dorian himself.  But who had done it?  He seemed to
recognize his own brushwork, and the frame was his own design.  The
idea was monstrous, yet he felt afraid.  He seized the lighted candle,
and held it to the picture.  In the left-hand corner was his own name,
traced in long letters of bright vermilion.

It was some foul parody, some infamous ignoble satire.  He had never
done that.  Still, it was his own picture.  He knew it, and he felt as
if his blood had changed in a moment from fire to sluggish ice.  His
own picture!  What did it mean?  Why had it altered?  He turned and
looked at Dorian Gray with the eyes of a sick man.  His mouth twitched,
and his parched tongue seemed unable to articulate.  He passed his hand
across his forehead.  It was dank with clammy sweat.

The young man was leaning against the mantelshelf, watching him with
that strange expression that one sees on the faces of those who are
absorbed in a play when some great artist is acting.  There was neither
real sorrow in it nor real joy.  There was simply the passion of the
spectator, with perhaps a flicker of triumph in his eyes.  He had taken
the flower out of his coat, and was smelling it, or pretending to do so.

"What does this mean?" cried Hallward, at last.  His own voice sounded
shrill and curious in his ears.

"Years ago, when I was a boy," said Dorian Gray, crushing the flower in
his hand, "you met me, flattered me, and taught me to be vain of my
good looks.  One day you introduced me to a friend of yours, who
explained to me the wonder of youth, and you finished a portrait of me
that revealed to me the wonder of beauty.  In a mad moment that, even
now, I don't know whether I regret or not, I made a wish, perhaps you
would call it a prayer...."

"I remember it!  Oh, how well I remember it!  No! the thing is
impossible.  The room is damp.  Mildew has got into the canvas.  The
paints I used had some wretched mineral poison in them.  I tell you the
thing is impossible."

"Ah, what is impossible?" murmured the young man, going over to the
window and leaning his forehead against the cold, mist-stained glass.

"You told me you had destroyed it."

"I was wrong.  It has destroyed me."

"I don't believe it is my picture."

"Can't you see your ideal in it?" said Dorian bitterly.

"My ideal, as you call it..."

"As you called it."

"There was nothing evil in it, nothing shameful.  You were to me such
an ideal as I shall never meet again.  This is the face of a satyr."

"It is the face of my soul."

"Christ! what a thing I must have worshipped!  It has the eyes of a
devil."

"Each of us has heaven and hell in him, Basil," cried Dorian with a
wild gesture of despair.

Hallward turned again to the portrait and gazed at it.  "My God!  If it
is true," he exclaimed, "and this is what you have done with your life,
why, you must be worse even than those who talk against you fancy you
to be!" He held the light up again to the canvas and examined it.  The
surface seemed to be quite undisturbed and as he had left it.  It was
from within, apparently, that the foulness and horror had come.
Through some strange quickening of inner life the leprosies of sin were
slowly eating the thing away.  The rotting of a corpse in a watery
grave was not so fearful.

His hand shook, and the candle fell from its socket on the floor and
lay there sputtering.  He placed his foot on it and put it out.  Then
he flung himself into the rickety chair that was standing by the table
and buried his face in his hands.

"Good God, Dorian, what a lesson!  What an awful lesson!" There was no
answer, but he could hear the young man sobbing at the window.  "Pray,
Dorian, pray," he murmured.  "What is it that one was taught to say in
one's boyhood?  'Lead us not into temptation.  Forgive us our sins.
Wash away our iniquities.'  Let us say that together.  The prayer of
your pride has been answered.  The prayer of your repentance will be
answered also.  I worshipped you too much.  I am punished for it.  You
worshipped yourself too much.  We are both punished."

Dorian Gray turned slowly around and looked at him with tear-dimmed
eyes.  "It is too late, Basil," he faltered.

"It is never too late, Dorian.  Let us kneel down and try if we cannot
remember a prayer.  Isn't there a verse somewhere, 'Though your sins be
as scarlet, yet I will make them as white as snow'?"

"Those words mean nothing to me now."

"Hush!  Don't say that.  You have done enough evil in your life.  My
God!  Don't you see that accursed thing leering at us?"

Dorian Gray glanced at the picture, and suddenly an uncontrollable
feeling of hatred for Basil Hallward came over him, as though it had
been suggested to him by the image on the canvas, whispered into his
ear by those grinning lips.  The mad passions of a hunted animal
stirred within him, and he loathed the man who was seated at the table,
more than in his whole life he had ever loathed anything.  He glanced
wildly around.  Something glimmered on the top of the painted chest
that faced him.  His eye fell on it.  He knew what it was.  It was a
knife that he had brought up, some days before, to cut a piece of cord,
and had forgotten to take away with him.  He moved slowly towards it,
passing Hallward as he did so.  As soon as he got behind him, he seized
it and turned round.  Hallward stirred in his chair as if he was going
to rise.  He rushed at him and dug the knife into the great vein that
is behind the ear, crushing the man's head down on the table and
stabbing again and again.

There was a stifled groan and the horrible sound of some one choking
with blood.  Three times the outstretched arms shot up convulsively,
waving grotesque, stiff-fingered hands in the air.  He stabbed him
twice more, but the man did not move.  Something began to trickle on
the floor.  He waited for a moment, still pressing the head down.  Then
he threw the knife on the table, and listened.

He could hear nothing, but the drip, drip on the threadbare carpet.  He
opened the door and went out on the landing.  The house was absolutely
quiet.  No one was about.  For a few seconds he stood bending over the
balustrade and peering down into the black seething well of darkness.
Then he took out the key and returned to the room, locking himself in
as he did so.

The thing was still seated in the chair, straining over the table with
bowed head, and humped back, and long fantastic arms.  Had it not been
for the red jagged tear in the neck and the clotted black pool that was
slowly widening on the table, one would have said that the man was
simply asleep.

How quickly it had all been done!  He felt strangely calm, and walking
over to the window, opened it and stepped out on the balcony.  The wind
had blown the fog away, and the sky was like a monstrous peacock's
tail, starred with myriads of golden eyes.  He looked down and saw the
policeman going his rounds and flashing the long beam of his lantern on
the doors of the silent houses.  The crimson spot of a prowling hansom
gleamed at the corner and then vanished.  A woman in a fluttering shawl
was creeping slowly by the railings, staggering as she went.  Now and
then she stopped and peered back.  Once, she began to sing in a hoarse
voice.  The policeman strolled over and said something to her.  She
stumbled away, laughing.  A bitter blast swept across the square.  The
gas-lamps flickered and became blue, and the leafless trees shook their
black iron branches to and fro.  He shivered and went back, closing the
window behind him.

Having reached the door, he turned the key and opened it.  He did not
even glance at the murdered man.  He felt that the secret of the whole
thing was not to realize the situation.  The friend who had painted the
fatal portrait to which all his misery had been due had gone out of his
life.  That was enough.

Then he remembered the lamp.  It was a rather curious one of Moorish
workmanship, made of dull silver inlaid with arabesques of burnished
steel, and studded with coarse turquoises.  Perhaps it might be missed
by his servant, and questions would be asked.  He hesitated for a
moment, then he turned back and took it from the table.  He could not
help seeing the dead thing.  How still it was!  How horribly white the
long hands looked!  It was like a dreadful wax image.

Having locked the door behind him, he crept quietly downstairs.  The
woodwork creaked and seemed to cry out as if in pain.  He stopped
several times and waited.  No:  everything was still.  It was merely
the sound of his own footsteps.

When he reached the library, he saw the bag and coat in the corner.
They must be hidden away somewhere.  He unlocked a secret press that
was in the wainscoting, a press in which he kept his own curious
disguises, and put them into it.  He could easily burn them afterwards.
Then he pulled out his watch.  It was twenty minutes to two.

He sat down and began to think.  Every year--every month, almost--men
were strangled in England for what he had done.  There had been a
madness of murder in the air.  Some red star had come too close to the
earth.... And yet, what evidence was there against him?  Basil Hallward
had left the house at eleven.  No one had seen him come in again.  Most
of the servants were at Selby Royal.  His valet had gone to bed....
Paris!  Yes.  It was to Paris that Basil had gone, and by the midnight
train, as he had intended.  With his curious reserved habits, it would
be months before any suspicions would be roused.  Months!  Everything
could be destroyed long before then.

A sudden thought struck him.  He put on his fur coat and hat and went
out into the hall.  There he paused, hearing the slow heavy tread of
the policeman on the pavement outside and seeing the flash of the
bull's-eye reflected in the window.  He waited and held his breath.

After a few moments he drew back the latch and slipped out, shutting
the door very gently behind him.  Then he began ringing the bell.  In
about five minutes his valet appeared, half-dressed and looking very
drowsy.

"I am sorry to have had to wake you up, Francis," he said, stepping in;
"but I had forgotten my latch-key. What time is it?"

"Ten minutes past two, sir," answered the man, looking at the clock and
blinking.

"Ten minutes past two?  How horribly late!  You must wake me at nine
to-morrow. I have some work to do."

"All right, sir."

"Did any one call this evening?"

"Mr. Hallward, sir.  He stayed here till eleven, and then he went away
to catch his train."

"Oh!  I am sorry I didn't see him.  Did he leave any message?"

"No, sir, except that he would write to you from Paris, if he did not
find you at the club."

"That will do, Francis.  Don't forget to call me at nine to-morrow."

"No, sir."

The man shambled down the passage in his slippers.

Dorian Gray threw his hat and coat upon the table and passed into the
library.  For a quarter of an hour he walked up and down the room,
biting his lip and thinking.  Then he took down the Blue Book from one
of the shelves and began to turn over the leaves.  "Alan Campbell, 152,
Hertford Street, Mayfair."  Yes; that was the man he wanted.



CHAPTER 14

At nine o'clock the next morning his servant came in with a cup of
chocolate on a tray and opened the shutters.  Dorian was sleeping quite
peacefully, lying on his right side, with one hand underneath his
cheek.  He looked like a boy who had been tired out with play, or study.

The man had to touch him twice on the shoulder before he woke, and as
he opened his eyes a faint smile passed across his lips, as though he
had been lost in some delightful dream.  Yet he had not dreamed at all.
His night had been untroubled by any images of pleasure or of pain.
But youth smiles without any reason.  It is one of its chiefest charms.

He turned round, and leaning upon his elbow, began to sip his
chocolate.  The mellow November sun came streaming into the room.  The
sky was bright, and there was a genial warmth in the air.  It was
almost like a morning in May.

Gradually the events of the preceding night crept with silent,
blood-stained feet into his brain and reconstructed themselves there
with terrible distinctness.  He winced at the memory of all that he had
suffered, and for a moment the same curious feeling of loathing for
Basil Hallward that had made him kill him as he sat in the chair came
back to him, and he grew cold with passion.  The dead man was still
sitting there, too, and in the sunlight now.  How horrible that was!
Such hideous things were for the darkness, not for the day.

He felt that if he brooded on what he had gone through he would sicken
or grow mad.  There were sins whose fascination was more in the memory
than in the doing of them, strange triumphs that gratified the pride
more than the passions, and gave to the intellect a quickened sense of
joy, greater than any joy they brought, or could ever bring, to the
senses.  But this was not one of them.  It was a thing to be driven out
of the mind, to be drugged with poppies, to be strangled lest it might
strangle one itself.

When the half-hour struck, he passed his hand across his forehead, and
then got up hastily and dressed himself with even more than his usual
care, giving a good deal of attention to the choice of his necktie and
scarf-pin and changing his rings more than once.  He spent a long time
also over breakfast, tasting the various dishes, talking to his valet
about some new liveries that he was thinking of getting made for the
servants at Selby, and going through his correspondence.  At some of
the letters, he smiled.  Three of them bored him.  One he read several
times over and then tore up with a slight look of annoyance in his
face.  "That awful thing, a woman's memory!" as Lord Henry had once
said.

After he had drunk his cup of black coffee, he wiped his lips slowly
with a napkin, motioned to his servant to wait, and going over to the
table, sat down and wrote two letters.  One he put in his pocket, the
other he handed to the valet.

"Take this round to 152, Hertford Street, Francis, and if Mr. Campbell
is out of town, get his address."

As soon as he was alone, he lit a cigarette and began sketching upon a
piece of paper, drawing first flowers and bits of architecture, and
then human faces.  Suddenly he remarked that every face that he drew
seemed to have a fantastic likeness to Basil Hallward.  He frowned, and
getting up, went over to the book-case and took out a volume at hazard.
He was determined that he would not think about what had happened until
it became absolutely necessary that he should do so.

When he had stretched himself on the sofa, he looked at the title-page
of the book.  It was Gautier's Emaux et Camees, Charpentier's
Japanese-paper edition, with the Jacquemart etching.  The binding was
of citron-green leather, with a design of gilt trellis-work and dotted
pomegranates.  It had been given to him by Adrian Singleton.  As he
turned over the pages, his eye fell on the poem about the hand of
Lacenaire, the cold yellow hand "_du supplice encore mal lavee_," with
its downy red hairs and its "_doigts de faune_."  He glanced at his own
white taper fingers, shuddering slightly in spite of himself, and
passed on, till he came to those lovely stanzas upon Venice:

     Sur une gamme chromatique,
       Le sein de perles ruisselant,
     La Venus de l'Adriatique
       Sort de l'eau son corps rose et blanc.

     Les domes, sur l'azur des ondes
       Suivant la phrase au pur contour,
     S'enflent comme des gorges rondes
       Que souleve un soupir d'amour.

     L'esquif aborde et me depose,
       Jetant son amarre au pilier,
     Devant une facade rose,
       Sur le marbre d'un escalier.


How exquisite they were!  As one read them, one seemed to be floating
down the green water-ways of the pink and pearl city, seated in a black
gondola with silver prow and trailing curtains.  The mere lines looked
to him like those straight lines of turquoise-blue that follow one as
one pushes out to the Lido.  The sudden flashes of colour reminded him
of the gleam of the opal-and-iris-throated birds that flutter round the
tall honeycombed Campanile, or stalk, with such stately grace, through
the dim, dust-stained arcades.  Leaning back with half-closed eyes, he
kept saying over and over to himself:

     "Devant une facade rose,
        Sur le marbre d'un escalier."

The whole of Venice was in those two lines.  He remembered the autumn
that he had passed there, and a wonderful love that had stirred him to
mad delightful follies.  There was romance in every place.  But Venice,
like Oxford, had kept the background for romance, and, to the true
romantic, background was everything, or almost everything.  Basil had
been with him part of the time, and had gone wild over Tintoret.  Poor
Basil!  What a horrible way for a man to die!

He sighed, and took up the volume again, and tried to forget.  He read
of the swallows that fly in and out of the little _cafe_ at Smyrna where
the Hadjis sit counting their amber beads and the turbaned merchants
smoke their long tasselled pipes and talk gravely to each other; he
read of the Obelisk in the Place de la Concorde that weeps tears of
granite in its lonely sunless exile and longs to be back by the hot,
lotus-covered Nile, where there are Sphinxes, and rose-red ibises, and
white vultures with gilded claws, and crocodiles with small beryl eyes
that crawl over the green steaming mud; he began to brood over those
verses which, drawing music from kiss-stained marble, tell of that
curious statue that Gautier compares to a contralto voice, the "_monstre
charmant_" that couches in the porphyry-room of the Louvre.  But after a
time the book fell from his hand.  He grew nervous, and a horrible fit
of terror came over him.  What if Alan Campbell should be out of
England?  Days would elapse before he could come back.  Perhaps he
might refuse to come.  What could he do then?  Every moment was of
vital importance.

They had been great friends once, five years before--almost
inseparable, indeed.  Then the intimacy had come suddenly to an end.
When they met in society now, it was only Dorian Gray who smiled:  Alan
Campbell never did.

He was an extremely clever young man, though he had no real
appreciation of the visible arts, and whatever little sense of the
beauty of poetry he possessed he had gained entirely from Dorian.  His
dominant intellectual passion was for science.  At Cambridge he had
spent a great deal of his time working in the laboratory, and had taken
a good class in the Natural Science Tripos of his year.  Indeed, he was
still devoted to the study of chemistry, and had a laboratory of his
own in which he used to shut himself up all day long, greatly to the
annoyance of his mother, who had set her heart on his standing for
Parliament and had a vague idea that a chemist was a person who made up
prescriptions.  He was an excellent musician, however, as well, and
played both the violin and the piano better than most amateurs.  In
fact, it was music that had first brought him and Dorian Gray
together--music and that indefinable attraction that Dorian seemed to
be able to exercise whenever he wished--and, indeed, exercised often
without being conscious of it.  They had met at Lady Berkshire's the
night that Rubinstein played there, and after that used to be always
seen together at the opera and wherever good music was going on.  For
eighteen months their intimacy lasted.  Campbell was always either at
Selby Royal or in Grosvenor Square.  To him, as to many others, Dorian
Gray was the type of everything that is wonderful and fascinating in
life.  Whether or not a quarrel had taken place between them no one
ever knew.  But suddenly people remarked that they scarcely spoke when
they met and that Campbell seemed always to go away early from any
party at which Dorian Gray was present.  He had changed, too--was
strangely melancholy at times, appeared almost to dislike hearing
music, and would never himself play, giving as his excuse, when he was
called upon, that he was so absorbed in science that he had no time
left in which to practise.  And this was certainly true.  Every day he
seemed to become more interested in biology, and his name appeared once
or twice in some of the scientific reviews in connection with certain
curious experiments.

This was the man Dorian Gray was waiting for.  Every second he kept
glancing at the clock.  As the minutes went by he became horribly
agitated.  At last he got up and began to pace up and down the room,
looking like a beautiful caged thing.  He took long stealthy strides.
His hands were curiously cold.

The suspense became unbearable.  Time seemed to him to be crawling with
feet of lead, while he by monstrous winds was being swept towards the
jagged edge of some black cleft of precipice.  He knew what was waiting
for him there; saw it, indeed, and, shuddering, crushed with dank hands
his burning lids as though he would have robbed the very brain of sight
and driven the eyeballs back into their cave.  It was useless.  The
brain had its own food on which it battened, and the imagination, made
grotesque by terror, twisted and distorted as a living thing by pain,
danced like some foul puppet on a stand and grinned through moving
masks.  Then, suddenly, time stopped for him.  Yes:  that blind,
slow-breathing thing crawled no more, and horrible thoughts, time being
dead, raced nimbly on in front, and dragged a hideous future from its
grave, and showed it to him.  He stared at it.  Its very horror made
him stone.

At last the door opened and his servant entered.  He turned glazed eyes
upon him.

"Mr. Campbell, sir," said the man.

A sigh of relief broke from his parched lips, and the colour came back
to his cheeks.

"Ask him to come in at once, Francis."  He felt that he was himself
again.  His mood of cowardice had passed away.

The man bowed and retired.  In a few moments, Alan Campbell walked in,
looking very stern and rather pale, his pallor being intensified by his
coal-black hair and dark eyebrows.

"Alan!  This is kind of you.  I thank you for coming."

"I had intended never to enter your house again, Gray.  But you said it
was a matter of life and death."  His voice was hard and cold.  He
spoke with slow deliberation.  There was a look of contempt in the
steady searching gaze that he turned on Dorian.  He kept his hands in
the pockets of his Astrakhan coat, and seemed not to have noticed the
gesture with which he had been greeted.

"Yes:  it is a matter of life and death, Alan, and to more than one
person.  Sit down."

Campbell took a chair by the table, and Dorian sat opposite to him.
The two men's eyes met.  In Dorian's there was infinite pity.  He knew
that what he was going to do was dreadful.

After a strained moment of silence, he leaned across and said, very
quietly, but watching the effect of each word upon the face of him he
had sent for, "Alan, in a locked room at the top of this house, a room
to which nobody but myself has access, a dead man is seated at a table.
He has been dead ten hours now.  Don't stir, and don't look at me like
that.  Who the man is, why he died, how he died, are matters that do
not concern you.  What you have to do is this--"

"Stop, Gray.  I don't want to know anything further.  Whether what you
have told me is true or not true doesn't concern me.  I entirely
decline to be mixed up in your life.  Keep your horrible secrets to
yourself.  They don't interest me any more."

"Alan, they will have to interest you.  This one will have to interest
you.  I am awfully sorry for you, Alan.  But I can't help myself.  You
are the one man who is able to save me.  I am forced to bring you into
the matter.  I have no option.  Alan, you are scientific.  You know
about chemistry and things of that kind.  You have made experiments.
What you have got to do is to destroy the thing that is upstairs--to
destroy it so that not a vestige of it will be left.  Nobody saw this
person come into the house.  Indeed, at the present moment he is
supposed to be in Paris.  He will not be missed for months.  When he is
missed, there must be no trace of him found here.  You, Alan, you must
change him, and everything that belongs to him, into a handful of ashes
that I may scatter in the air."

"You are mad, Dorian."

"Ah!  I was waiting for you to call me Dorian."

"You are mad, I tell you--mad to imagine that I would raise a finger to
help you, mad to make this monstrous confession.  I will have nothing
to do with this matter, whatever it is.  Do you think I am going to
peril my reputation for you?  What is it to me what devil's work you
are up to?"

"It was suicide, Alan."

"I am glad of that.  But who drove him to it?  You, I should fancy."

"Do you still refuse to do this for me?"

"Of course I refuse.  I will have absolutely nothing to do with it.  I
don't care what shame comes on you.  You deserve it all.  I should not
be sorry to see you disgraced, publicly disgraced.  How dare you ask
me, of all men in the world, to mix myself up in this horror?  I should
have thought you knew more about people's characters.  Your friend Lord
Henry Wotton can't have taught you much about psychology, whatever else
he has taught you.  Nothing will induce me to stir a step to help you.
You have come to the wrong man.  Go to some of your friends.  Don't
come to me."

"Alan, it was murder.  I killed him.  You don't know what he had made
me suffer.  Whatever my life is, he had more to do with the making or
the marring of it than poor Harry has had.  He may not have intended
it, the result was the same."

"Murder!  Good God, Dorian, is that what you have come to?  I shall not
inform upon you.  It is not my business.  Besides, without my stirring
in the matter, you are certain to be arrested.  Nobody ever commits a
crime without doing something stupid.  But I will have nothing to do
with it."

"You must have something to do with it.  Wait, wait a moment; listen to
me.  Only listen, Alan.  All I ask of you is to perform a certain
scientific experiment.  You go to hospitals and dead-houses, and the
horrors that you do there don't affect you.  If in some hideous
dissecting-room or fetid laboratory you found this man lying on a
leaden table with red gutters scooped out in it for the blood to flow
through, you would simply look upon him as an admirable subject.  You
would not turn a hair.  You would not believe that you were doing
anything wrong.  On the contrary, you would probably feel that you were
benefiting the human race, or increasing the sum of knowledge in the
world, or gratifying intellectual curiosity, or something of that kind.
What I want you to do is merely what you have often done before.
Indeed, to destroy a body must be far less horrible than what you are
accustomed to work at.  And, remember, it is the only piece of evidence
against me.  If it is discovered, I am lost; and it is sure to be
discovered unless you help me."

"I have no desire to help you.  You forget that.  I am simply
indifferent to the whole thing.  It has nothing to do with me."

"Alan, I entreat you.  Think of the position I am in.  Just before you
came I almost fainted with terror.  You may know terror yourself some
day.  No! don't think of that.  Look at the matter purely from the
scientific point of view.  You don't inquire where the dead things on
which you experiment come from.  Don't inquire now.  I have told you
too much as it is.  But I beg of you to do this.  We were friends once,
Alan."

"Don't speak about those days, Dorian--they are dead."

"The dead linger sometimes.  The man upstairs will not go away.  He is
sitting at the table with bowed head and outstretched arms.  Alan!
Alan!  If you don't come to my assistance, I am ruined.  Why, they will
hang me, Alan!  Don't you understand?  They will hang me for what I
have done."

"There is no good in prolonging this scene.  I absolutely refuse to do
anything in the matter.  It is insane of you to ask me."

"You refuse?"

"Yes."

"I entreat you, Alan."

"It is useless."

The same look of pity came into Dorian Gray's eyes.  Then he stretched
out his hand, took a piece of paper, and wrote something on it.  He
read it over twice, folded it carefully, and pushed it across the
table.  Having done this, he got up and went over to the window.

Campbell looked at him in surprise, and then took up the paper, and
opened it.  As he read it, his face became ghastly pale and he fell
back in his chair.  A horrible sense of sickness came over him.  He
felt as if his heart was beating itself to death in some empty hollow.

After two or three minutes of terrible silence, Dorian turned round and
came and stood behind him, putting his hand upon his shoulder.

"I am so sorry for you, Alan," he murmured, "but you leave me no
alternative.  I have a letter written already.  Here it is.  You see
the address.  If you don't help me, I must send it.  If you don't help
me, I will send it.  You know what the result will be.  But you are
going to help me.  It is impossible for you to refuse now.  I tried to
spare you.  You will do me the justice to admit that.  You were stern,
harsh, offensive.  You treated me as no man has ever dared to treat
me--no living man, at any rate.  I bore it all.  Now it is for me to
dictate terms."

Campbell buried his face in his hands, and a shudder passed through him.

"Yes, it is my turn to dictate terms, Alan.  You know what they are.
The thing is quite simple.  Come, don't work yourself into this fever.
The thing has to be done.  Face it, and do it."

A groan broke from Campbell's lips and he shivered all over.  The
ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece seemed to him to be dividing
time into separate atoms of agony, each of which was too terrible to be
borne.  He felt as if an iron ring was being slowly tightened round his
forehead, as if the disgrace with which he was threatened had already
come upon him.  The hand upon his shoulder weighed like a hand of lead.
It was intolerable.  It seemed to crush him.

"Come, Alan, you must decide at once."

"I cannot do it," he said, mechanically, as though words could alter
things.

"You must.  You have no choice.  Don't delay."

He hesitated a moment.  "Is there a fire in the room upstairs?"

"Yes, there is a gas-fire with asbestos."

"I shall have to go home and get some things from the laboratory."

"No, Alan, you must not leave the house.  Write out on a sheet of
notepaper what you want and my servant will take a cab and bring the
things back to you."

Campbell scrawled a few lines, blotted them, and addressed an envelope
to his assistant.  Dorian took the note up and read it carefully.  Then
he rang the bell and gave it to his valet, with orders to return as
soon as possible and to bring the things with him.

As the hall door shut, Campbell started nervously, and having got up
from the chair, went over to the chimney-piece. He was shivering with a
kind of ague.  For nearly twenty minutes, neither of the men spoke.  A
fly buzzed noisily about the room, and the ticking of the clock was
like the beat of a hammer.

As the chime struck one, Campbell turned round, and looking at Dorian
Gray, saw that his eyes were filled with tears.  There was something in
the purity and refinement of that sad face that seemed to enrage him.
"You are infamous, absolutely infamous!" he muttered.

"Hush, Alan.  You have saved my life," said Dorian.

"Your life?  Good heavens! what a life that is!  You have gone from
corruption to corruption, and now you have culminated in crime.  In
doing what I am going to do--what you force me to do--it is not of your
life that I am thinking."

"Ah, Alan," murmured Dorian with a sigh, "I wish you had a thousandth
part of the pity for me that I have for you." He turned away as he
spoke and stood looking out at the garden.  Campbell made no answer.

After about ten minutes a knock came to the door, and the servant
entered, carrying a large mahogany chest of chemicals, with a long coil
of steel and platinum wire and two rather curiously shaped iron clamps.

"Shall I leave the things here, sir?" he asked Campbell.

"Yes," said Dorian.  "And I am afraid, Francis, that I have another
errand for you.  What is the name of the man at Richmond who supplies
Selby with orchids?"

"Harden, sir."

"Yes--Harden.  You must go down to Richmond at once, see Harden
personally, and tell him to send twice as many orchids as I ordered,
and to have as few white ones as possible.  In fact, I don't want any
white ones.  It is a lovely day, Francis, and Richmond is a very pretty
place--otherwise I wouldn't bother you about it."

"No trouble, sir.  At what time shall I be back?"

Dorian looked at Campbell.  "How long will your experiment take, Alan?"
he said in a calm indifferent voice.  The presence of a third person in
the room seemed to give him extraordinary courage.

Campbell frowned and bit his lip.  "It will take about five hours," he
answered.

"It will be time enough, then, if you are back at half-past seven,
Francis.  Or stay:  just leave my things out for dressing.  You can
have the evening to yourself.  I am not dining at home, so I shall not
want you."

"Thank you, sir," said the man, leaving the room.

"Now, Alan, there is not a moment to be lost.  How heavy this chest is!
I'll take it for you.  You bring the other things."  He spoke rapidly
and in an authoritative manner.  Campbell felt dominated by him.  They
left the room together.

When they reached the top landing, Dorian took out the key and turned
it in the lock.  Then he stopped, and a troubled look came into his
eyes.  He shuddered.  "I don't think I can go in, Alan," he murmured.

"It is nothing to me.  I don't require you," said Campbell coldly.

Dorian half opened the door.  As he did so, he saw the face of his
portrait leering in the sunlight.  On the floor in front of it the torn
curtain was lying.  He remembered that the night before he had
forgotten, for the first time in his life, to hide the fatal canvas,
and was about to rush forward, when he drew back with a shudder.

What was that loathsome red dew that gleamed, wet and glistening, on
one of the hands, as though the canvas had sweated blood?  How horrible
it was!--more horrible, it seemed to him for the moment, than the
silent thing that he knew was stretched across the table, the thing
whose grotesque misshapen shadow on the spotted carpet showed him that
it had not stirred, but was still there, as he had left it.

He heaved a deep breath, opened the door a little wider, and with
half-closed eyes and averted head, walked quickly in, determined that
he would not look even once upon the dead man.  Then, stooping down and
taking up the gold-and-purple hanging, he flung it right over the
picture.

There he stopped, feeling afraid to turn round, and his eyes fixed
themselves on the intricacies of the pattern before him.  He heard
Campbell bringing in the heavy chest, and the irons, and the other
things that he had required for his dreadful work.  He began to wonder
if he and Basil Hallward had ever met, and, if so, what they had
thought of each other.

"Leave me now," said a stern voice behind him.

He turned and hurried out, just conscious that the dead man had been
thrust back into the chair and that Campbell was gazing into a
glistening yellow face.  As he was going downstairs, he heard the key
being turned in the lock.

It was long after seven when Campbell came back into the library.  He
was pale, but absolutely calm.  "I have done what you asked me to do,"
he muttered. "And now, good-bye. Let us never see each other again."

"You have saved me from ruin, Alan.  I cannot forget that," said Dorian
simply.

As soon as Campbell had left, he went upstairs.  There was a horrible
smell of nitric acid in the room.  But the thing that had been sitting
at the table was gone.



CHAPTER 15

That evening, at eight-thirty, exquisitely dressed and wearing a large
button-hole of Parma violets, Dorian Gray was ushered into Lady
Narborough's drawing-room by bowing servants.  His forehead was
throbbing with maddened nerves, and he felt wildly excited, but his
manner as he bent over his hostess's hand was as easy and graceful as
ever.  Perhaps one never seems so much at one's ease as when one has to
play a part.  Certainly no one looking at Dorian Gray that night could
have believed that he had passed through a tragedy as horrible as any
tragedy of our age.  Those finely shaped fingers could never have
clutched a knife for sin, nor those smiling lips have cried out on God
and goodness.  He himself could not help wondering at the calm of his
demeanour, and for a moment felt keenly the terrible pleasure of a
double life.

It was a small party, got up rather in a hurry by Lady Narborough, who
was a very clever woman with what Lord Henry used to describe as the
remains of really remarkable ugliness.  She had proved an excellent
wife to one of our most tedious ambassadors, and having buried her
husband properly in a marble mausoleum, which she had herself designed,
and married off her daughters to some rich, rather elderly men, she
devoted herself now to the pleasures of French fiction, French cookery,
and French _esprit_ when she could get it.

Dorian was one of her especial favourites, and she always told him that
she was extremely glad she had not met him in early life.  "I know, my
dear, I should have fallen madly in love with you," she used to say,
"and thrown my bonnet right over the mills for your sake.  It is most
fortunate that you were not thought of at the time.  As it was, our
bonnets were so unbecoming, and the mills were so occupied in trying to
raise the wind, that I never had even a flirtation with anybody.
However, that was all Narborough's fault.  He was dreadfully
short-sighted, and there is no pleasure in taking in a husband who
never sees anything."

Her guests this evening were rather tedious.  The fact was, as she
explained to Dorian, behind a very shabby fan, one of her married
daughters had come up quite suddenly to stay with her, and, to make
matters worse, had actually brought her husband with her.  "I think it
is most unkind of her, my dear," she whispered.  "Of course I go and
stay with them every summer after I come from Homburg, but then an old
woman like me must have fresh air sometimes, and besides, I really wake
them up.  You don't know what an existence they lead down there.  It is
pure unadulterated country life.  They get up early, because they have
so much to do, and go to bed early, because they have so little to
think about.  There has not been a scandal in the neighbourhood since
the time of Queen Elizabeth, and consequently they all fall asleep
after dinner.  You shan't sit next either of them.  You shall sit by me
and amuse me."

Dorian murmured a graceful compliment and looked round the room.  Yes:
it was certainly a tedious party.  Two of the people he had never seen
before, and the others consisted of Ernest Harrowden, one of those
middle-aged mediocrities so common in London clubs who have no enemies,
but are thoroughly disliked by their friends; Lady Ruxton, an
overdressed woman of forty-seven, with a hooked nose, who was always
trying to get herself compromised, but was so peculiarly plain that to
her great disappointment no one would ever believe anything against
her; Mrs. Erlynne, a pushing nobody, with a delightful lisp and
Venetian-red hair; Lady Alice Chapman, his hostess's daughter, a dowdy
dull girl, with one of those characteristic British faces that, once
seen, are never remembered; and her husband, a red-cheeked,
white-whiskered creature who, like so many of his class, was under the
impression that inordinate joviality can atone for an entire lack of
ideas.

He was rather sorry he had come, till Lady Narborough, looking at the
great ormolu gilt clock that sprawled in gaudy curves on the
mauve-draped mantelshelf, exclaimed:  "How horrid of Henry Wotton to be
so late!  I sent round to him this morning on chance and he promised
faithfully not to disappoint me."

It was some consolation that Harry was to be there, and when the door
opened and he heard his slow musical voice lending charm to some
insincere apology, he ceased to feel bored.

But at dinner he could not eat anything.  Plate after plate went away
untasted.  Lady Narborough kept scolding him for what she called "an
insult to poor Adolphe, who invented the _menu_ specially for you," and
now and then Lord Henry looked across at him, wondering at his silence
and abstracted manner.  From time to time the butler filled his glass
with champagne.  He drank eagerly, and his thirst seemed to increase.

"Dorian," said Lord Henry at last, as the _chaud-froid_ was being handed
round, "what is the matter with you to-night? You are quite out of
sorts."

"I believe he is in love," cried Lady Narborough, "and that he is
afraid to tell me for fear I should be jealous.  He is quite right.  I
certainly should."

"Dear Lady Narborough," murmured Dorian, smiling, "I have not been in
love for a whole week--not, in fact, since Madame de Ferrol left town."

"How you men can fall in love with that woman!" exclaimed the old lady.
"I really cannot understand it."

"It is simply because she remembers you when you were a little girl,
Lady Narborough," said Lord Henry.  "She is the one link between us and
your short frocks."

"She does not remember my short frocks at all, Lord Henry.  But I
remember her very well at Vienna thirty years ago, and how _decolletee_
she was then."

"She is still _decolletee_," he answered, taking an olive in his long
fingers; "and when she is in a very smart gown she looks like an
_edition de luxe_ of a bad French novel.  She is really wonderful, and
full of surprises.  Her capacity for family affection is extraordinary.
When her third husband died, her hair turned quite gold from grief."

"How can you, Harry!" cried Dorian.

"It is a most romantic explanation," laughed the hostess.  "But her
third husband, Lord Henry!  You don't mean to say Ferrol is the fourth?"

"Certainly, Lady Narborough."

"I don't believe a word of it."

"Well, ask Mr. Gray.  He is one of her most intimate friends."

"Is it true, Mr. Gray?"

"She assures me so, Lady Narborough," said Dorian.  "I asked her
whether, like Marguerite de Navarre, she had their hearts embalmed and
hung at her girdle.  She told me she didn't, because none of them had
had any hearts at all."

"Four husbands!  Upon my word that is _trop de zele_."

"_Trop d'audace_, I tell her," said Dorian.

"Oh! she is audacious enough for anything, my dear.  And what is Ferrol
like?  I don't know him."

"The husbands of very beautiful women belong to the criminal classes,"
said Lord Henry, sipping his wine.

Lady Narborough hit him with her fan.  "Lord Henry, I am not at all
surprised that the world says that you are extremely wicked."

"But what world says that?" asked Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows.
"It can only be the next world.  This world and I are on excellent
terms."

"Everybody I know says you are very wicked," cried the old lady,
shaking her head.

Lord Henry looked serious for some moments.  "It is perfectly
monstrous," he said, at last, "the way people go about nowadays saying
things against one behind one's back that are absolutely and entirely
true."

"Isn't he incorrigible?" cried Dorian, leaning forward in his chair.

"I hope so," said his hostess, laughing.  "But really, if you all
worship Madame de Ferrol in this ridiculous way, I shall have to marry
again so as to be in the fashion."

"You will never marry again, Lady Narborough," broke in Lord Henry.
"You were far too happy.  When a woman marries again, it is because she
detested her first husband.  When a man marries again, it is because he
adored his first wife.  Women try their luck; men risk theirs."

"Narborough wasn't perfect," cried the old lady.

"If he had been, you would not have loved him, my dear lady," was the
rejoinder.  "Women love us for our defects.  If we have enough of them,
they will forgive us everything, even our intellects.  You will never
ask me to dinner again after saying this, I am afraid, Lady Narborough,
but it is quite true."

"Of course it is true, Lord Henry.  If we women did not love you for
your defects, where would you all be?  Not one of you would ever be
married.  You would be a set of unfortunate bachelors.  Not, however,
that that would alter you much.  Nowadays all the married men live like
bachelors, and all the bachelors like married men."

"_Fin de siecle_," murmured Lord Henry.

"_Fin du globe_," answered his hostess.

"I wish it were _fin du globe_," said Dorian with a sigh.  "Life is a
great disappointment."

"Ah, my dear," cried Lady Narborough, putting on her gloves, "don't
tell me that you have exhausted life.  When a man says that one knows
that life has exhausted him.  Lord Henry is very wicked, and I
sometimes wish that I had been; but you are made to be good--you look
so good.  I must find you a nice wife.  Lord Henry, don't you think
that Mr. Gray should get married?"

"I am always telling him so, Lady Narborough," said Lord Henry with a
bow.

"Well, we must look out for a suitable match for him.  I shall go
through Debrett carefully to-night and draw out a list of all the
eligible young ladies."

"With their ages, Lady Narborough?" asked Dorian.

"Of course, with their ages, slightly edited.  But nothing must be done
in a hurry.  I want it to be what _The Morning Post_ calls a suitable
alliance, and I want you both to be happy."

"What nonsense people talk about happy marriages!" exclaimed Lord
Henry.  "A man can be happy with any woman, as long as he does not love
her."

"Ah! what a cynic you are!" cried the old lady, pushing back her chair
and nodding to Lady Ruxton.  "You must come and dine with me soon
again.  You are really an admirable tonic, much better than what Sir
Andrew prescribes for me.  You must tell me what people you would like
to meet, though.  I want it to be a delightful gathering."

"I like men who have a future and women who have a past," he answered.
"Or do you think that would make it a petticoat party?"

"I fear so," she said, laughing, as she stood up.  "A thousand pardons,
my dear Lady Ruxton," she added, "I didn't see you hadn't finished your
cigarette."

"Never mind, Lady Narborough.  I smoke a great deal too much.  I am
going to limit myself, for the future."

"Pray don't, Lady Ruxton," said Lord Henry.  "Moderation is a fatal
thing.  Enough is as bad as a meal.  More than enough is as good as a
feast."

Lady Ruxton glanced at him curiously.  "You must come and explain that
to me some afternoon, Lord Henry.  It sounds a fascinating theory," she
murmured, as she swept out of the room.

"Now, mind you don't stay too long over your politics and scandal,"
cried Lady Narborough from the door.  "If you do, we are sure to
squabble upstairs."

The men laughed, and Mr. Chapman got up solemnly from the foot of the
table and came up to the top.  Dorian Gray changed his seat and went
and sat by Lord Henry.  Mr. Chapman began to talk in a loud voice about
the situation in the House of Commons.  He guffawed at his adversaries.
The word _doctrinaire_--word full of terror to the British
mind--reappeared from time to time between his explosions.  An
alliterative prefix served as an ornament of oratory.  He hoisted the
Union Jack on the pinnacles of thought.  The inherited stupidity of the
race--sound English common sense he jovially termed it--was shown to be
the proper bulwark for society.

A smile curved Lord Henry's lips, and he turned round and looked at
Dorian.

"Are you better, my dear fellow?" he asked.  "You seemed rather out of
sorts at dinner."

"I am quite well, Harry.  I am tired.  That is all."

"You were charming last night.  The little duchess is quite devoted to
you.  She tells me she is going down to Selby."

"She has promised to come on the twentieth."

"Is Monmouth to be there, too?"

"Oh, yes, Harry."

"He bores me dreadfully, almost as much as he bores her.  She is very
clever, too clever for a woman.  She lacks the indefinable charm of
weakness.  It is the feet of clay that make the gold of the image
precious.  Her feet are very pretty, but they are not feet of clay.
White porcelain feet, if you like.  They have been through the fire,
and what fire does not destroy, it hardens.  She has had experiences."

"How long has she been married?" asked Dorian.

"An eternity, she tells me.  I believe, according to the peerage, it is
ten years, but ten years with Monmouth must have been like eternity,
with time thrown in.  Who else is coming?"

"Oh, the Willoughbys, Lord Rugby and his wife, our hostess, Geoffrey
Clouston, the usual set.  I have asked Lord Grotrian."

"I like him," said Lord Henry.  "A great many people don't, but I find
him charming.  He atones for being occasionally somewhat overdressed by
being always absolutely over-educated. He is a very modern type."

"I don't know if he will be able to come, Harry.  He may have to go to
Monte Carlo with his father."

"Ah! what a nuisance people's people are!  Try and make him come.  By
the way, Dorian, you ran off very early last night.  You left before
eleven.  What did you do afterwards?  Did you go straight home?"

Dorian glanced at him hurriedly and frowned.

"No, Harry," he said at last, "I did not get home till nearly three."

"Did you go to the club?"

"Yes," he answered.  Then he bit his lip.  "No, I don't mean that.  I
didn't go to the club.  I walked about.  I forget what I did.... How
inquisitive you are, Harry!  You always want to know what one has been
doing.  I always want to forget what I have been doing.  I came in at
half-past two, if you wish to know the exact time.  I had left my
latch-key at home, and my servant had to let me in.  If you want any
corroborative evidence on the subject, you can ask him."

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.  "My dear fellow, as if I cared!
Let us go up to the drawing-room. No sherry, thank you, Mr. Chapman.
Something has happened to you, Dorian.  Tell me what it is.  You are
not yourself to-night."

"Don't mind me, Harry.  I am irritable, and out of temper.  I shall
come round and see you to-morrow, or next day.  Make my excuses to Lady
Narborough.  I shan't go upstairs.  I shall go home.  I must go home."

"All right, Dorian.  I dare say I shall see you to-morrow at tea-time.
The duchess is coming."

"I will try to be there, Harry," he said, leaving the room.  As he
drove back to his own house, he was conscious that the sense of terror
he thought he had strangled had come back to him.  Lord Henry's casual
questioning had made him lose his nerve for the moment, and he wanted
his nerve still.  Things that were dangerous had to be destroyed.  He
winced.  He hated the idea of even touching them.

Yet it had to be done.  He realized that, and when he had locked the
door of his library, he opened the secret press into which he had
thrust Basil Hallward's coat and bag.  A huge fire was blazing.  He
piled another log on it.  The smell of the singeing clothes and burning
leather was horrible.  It took him three-quarters of an hour to consume
everything.  At the end he felt faint and sick, and having lit some
Algerian pastilles in a pierced copper brazier, he bathed his hands and
forehead with a cool musk-scented vinegar.

Suddenly he started.  His eyes grew strangely bright, and he gnawed
nervously at his underlip.  Between two of the windows stood a large
Florentine cabinet, made out of ebony and inlaid with ivory and blue
lapis.  He watched it as though it were a thing that could fascinate
and make afraid, as though it held something that he longed for and yet
almost loathed.  His breath quickened.  A mad craving came over him.
He lit a cigarette and then threw it away.  His eyelids drooped till
the long fringed lashes almost touched his cheek.  But he still watched
the cabinet.  At last he got up from the sofa on which he had been
lying, went over to it, and having unlocked it, touched some hidden
spring.  A triangular drawer passed slowly out.  His fingers moved
instinctively towards it, dipped in, and closed on something.  It was a
small Chinese box of black and gold-dust lacquer, elaborately wrought,
the sides patterned with curved waves, and the silken cords hung with
round crystals and tasselled in plaited metal threads.  He opened it.
Inside was a green paste, waxy in lustre, the odour curiously heavy and
persistent.

He hesitated for some moments, with a strangely immobile smile upon his
face.  Then shivering, though the atmosphere of the room was terribly
hot, he drew himself up and glanced at the clock.  It was twenty
minutes to twelve.  He put the box back, shutting the cabinet doors as
he did so, and went into his bedroom.

As midnight was striking bronze blows upon the dusky air, Dorian Gray,
dressed commonly, and with a muffler wrapped round his throat, crept
quietly out of his house.  In Bond Street he found a hansom with a good
horse.  He hailed it and in a low voice gave the driver an address.

The man shook his head.  "It is too far for me," he muttered.

"Here is a sovereign for you," said Dorian.  "You shall have another if
you drive fast."

"All right, sir," answered the man, "you will be there in an hour," and
after his fare had got in he turned his horse round and drove rapidly
towards the river.



CHAPTER 16

A cold rain began to fall, and the blurred street-lamps looked ghastly
in the dripping mist.  The public-houses were just closing, and dim men
and women were clustering in broken groups round their doors.  From
some of the bars came the sound of horrible laughter.  In others,
drunkards brawled and screamed.

Lying back in the hansom, with his hat pulled over his forehead, Dorian
Gray watched with listless eyes the sordid shame of the great city, and
now and then he repeated to himself the words that Lord Henry had said
to him on the first day they had met, "To cure the soul by means of the
senses, and the senses by means of the soul."  Yes, that was the
secret.  He had often tried it, and would try it again now.  There were
opium dens where one could buy oblivion, dens of horror where the
memory of old sins could be destroyed by the madness of sins that were
new.

The moon hung low in the sky like a yellow skull.  From time to time a
huge misshapen cloud stretched a long arm across and hid it.  The
gas-lamps grew fewer, and the streets more narrow and gloomy.  Once the
man lost his way and had to drive back half a mile.  A steam rose from
the horse as it splashed up the puddles.  The sidewindows of the hansom
were clogged with a grey-flannel mist.

"To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of
the soul!"  How the words rang in his ears!  His soul, certainly, was
sick to death.  Was it true that the senses could cure it?  Innocent
blood had been spilled.  What could atone for that?  Ah! for that there
was no atonement; but though forgiveness was impossible, forgetfulness
was possible still, and he was determined to forget, to stamp the thing
out, to crush it as one would crush the adder that had stung one.
Indeed, what right had Basil to have spoken to him as he had done?  Who
had made him a judge over others?  He had said things that were
dreadful, horrible, not to be endured.

On and on plodded the hansom, going slower, it seemed to him, at each
step.  He thrust up the trap and called to the man to drive faster.
The hideous hunger for opium began to gnaw at him.  His throat burned
and his delicate hands twitched nervously together.  He struck at the
horse madly with his stick.  The driver laughed and whipped up.  He
laughed in answer, and the man was silent.

The way seemed interminable, and the streets like the black web of some
sprawling spider.  The monotony became unbearable, and as the mist
thickened, he felt afraid.

Then they passed by lonely brickfields.  The fog was lighter here, and
he could see the strange, bottle-shaped kilns with their orange,
fanlike tongues of fire.  A dog barked as they went by, and far away in
the darkness some wandering sea-gull screamed.  The horse stumbled in a
rut, then swerved aside and broke into a gallop.

After some time they left the clay road and rattled again over
rough-paven streets.  Most of the windows were dark, but now and then
fantastic shadows were silhouetted against some lamplit blind.  He
watched them curiously.  They moved like monstrous marionettes and made
gestures like live things.  He hated them.  A dull rage was in his
heart.  As they turned a corner, a woman yelled something at them from
an open door, and two men ran after the hansom for about a hundred
yards.  The driver beat at them with his whip.

It is said that passion makes one think in a circle.  Certainly with
hideous iteration the bitten lips of Dorian Gray shaped and reshaped
those subtle words that dealt with soul and sense, till he had found in
them the full expression, as it were, of his mood, and justified, by
intellectual approval, passions that without such justification would
still have dominated his temper.  From cell to cell of his brain crept
the one thought; and the wild desire to live, most terrible of all
man's appetites, quickened into force each trembling nerve and fibre.
Ugliness that had once been hateful to him because it made things real,
became dear to him now for that very reason.  Ugliness was the one
reality.  The coarse brawl, the loathsome den, the crude violence of
disordered life, the very vileness of thief and outcast, were more
vivid, in their intense actuality of impression, than all the gracious
shapes of art, the dreamy shadows of song.  They were what he needed
for forgetfulness.  In three days he would be free.

Suddenly the man drew up with a jerk at the top of a dark lane.  Over
the low roofs and jagged chimney-stacks of the houses rose the black
masts of ships.  Wreaths of white mist clung like ghostly sails to the
yards.

"Somewhere about here, sir, ain't it?" he asked huskily through the
trap.

Dorian started and peered round.  "This will do," he answered, and
having got out hastily and given the driver the extra fare he had
promised him, he walked quickly in the direction of the quay.  Here and
there a lantern gleamed at the stern of some huge merchantman.  The
light shook and splintered in the puddles.  A red glare came from an
outward-bound steamer that was coaling.  The slimy pavement looked like
a wet mackintosh.

He hurried on towards the left, glancing back now and then to see if he
was being followed.  In about seven or eight minutes he reached a small
shabby house that was wedged in between two gaunt factories.  In one of
the top-windows stood a lamp.  He stopped and gave a peculiar knock.

After a little time he heard steps in the passage and the chain being
unhooked.  The door opened quietly, and he went in without saying a
word to the squat misshapen figure that flattened itself into the
shadow as he passed.  At the end of the hall hung a tattered green
curtain that swayed and shook in the gusty wind which had followed him
in from the street.  He dragged it aside and entered a long low room
which looked as if it had once been a third-rate dancing-saloon. Shrill
flaring gas-jets, dulled and distorted in the fly-blown mirrors that
faced them, were ranged round the walls.  Greasy reflectors of ribbed
tin backed them, making quivering disks of light.  The floor was
covered with ochre-coloured sawdust, trampled here and there into mud,
and stained with dark rings of spilled liquor.  Some Malays were
crouching by a little charcoal stove, playing with bone counters and
showing their white teeth as they chattered.  In one corner, with his
head buried in his arms, a sailor sprawled over a table, and by the
tawdrily painted bar that ran across one complete side stood two
haggard women, mocking an old man who was brushing the sleeves of his
coat with an expression of disgust.  "He thinks he's got red ants on
him," laughed one of them, as Dorian passed by.  The man looked at her
in terror and began to whimper.

At the end of the room there was a little staircase, leading to a
darkened chamber.  As Dorian hurried up its three rickety steps, the
heavy odour of opium met him.  He heaved a deep breath, and his
nostrils quivered with pleasure.  When he entered, a young man with
smooth yellow hair, who was bending over a lamp lighting a long thin
pipe, looked up at him and nodded in a hesitating manner.

"You here, Adrian?" muttered Dorian.

"Where else should I be?" he answered, listlessly.  "None of the chaps
will speak to me now."

"I thought you had left England."

"Darlington is not going to do anything.  My brother paid the bill at
last.  George doesn't speak to me either.... I don't care," he added
with a sigh.  "As long as one has this stuff, one doesn't want friends.
I think I have had too many friends."

Dorian winced and looked round at the grotesque things that lay in such
fantastic postures on the ragged mattresses.  The twisted limbs, the
gaping mouths, the staring lustreless eyes, fascinated him.  He knew in
what strange heavens they were suffering, and what dull hells were
teaching them the secret of some new joy.  They were better off than he
was.  He was prisoned in thought.  Memory, like a horrible malady, was
eating his soul away.  From time to time he seemed to see the eyes of
Basil Hallward looking at him.  Yet he felt he could not stay.  The
presence of Adrian Singleton troubled him.  He wanted to be where no
one would know who he was.  He wanted to escape from himself.

"I am going on to the other place," he said after a pause.

"On the wharf?"

"Yes."

"That mad-cat is sure to be there.  They won't have her in this place
now."

Dorian shrugged his shoulders.  "I am sick of women who love one.
Women who hate one are much more interesting.  Besides, the stuff is
better."

"Much the same."

"I like it better.  Come and have something to drink.  I must have
something."

"I don't want anything," murmured the young man.

"Never mind."

Adrian Singleton rose up wearily and followed Dorian to the bar.  A
half-caste, in a ragged turban and a shabby ulster, grinned a hideous
greeting as he thrust a bottle of brandy and two tumblers in front of
them.  The women sidled up and began to chatter.  Dorian turned his
back on them and said something in a low voice to Adrian Singleton.

A crooked smile, like a Malay crease, writhed across the face of one of
the women.  "We are very proud to-night," she sneered.

"For God's sake don't talk to me," cried Dorian, stamping his foot on
the ground.  "What do you want?  Money?  Here it is.  Don't ever talk
to me again."

Two red sparks flashed for a moment in the woman's sodden eyes, then
flickered out and left them dull and glazed.  She tossed her head and
raked the coins off the counter with greedy fingers.  Her companion
watched her enviously.

"It's no use," sighed Adrian Singleton.  "I don't care to go back.
What does it matter?  I am quite happy here."

"You will write to me if you want anything, won't you?" said Dorian,
after a pause.

"Perhaps."

"Good night, then."

"Good night," answered the young man, passing up the steps and wiping
his parched mouth with a handkerchief.

Dorian walked to the door with a look of pain in his face.  As he drew
the curtain aside, a hideous laugh broke from the painted lips of the
woman who had taken his money.  "There goes the devil's bargain!" she
hiccoughed, in a hoarse voice.

"Curse you!" he answered, "don't call me that."

She snapped her fingers.  "Prince Charming is what you like to be
called, ain't it?" she yelled after him.

The drowsy sailor leaped to his feet as she spoke, and looked wildly
round.  The sound of the shutting of the hall door fell on his ear.  He
rushed out as if in pursuit.

Dorian Gray hurried along the quay through the drizzling rain.  His
meeting with Adrian Singleton had strangely moved him, and he wondered
if the ruin of that young life was really to be laid at his door, as
Basil Hallward had said to him with such infamy of insult.  He bit his
lip, and for a few seconds his eyes grew sad.  Yet, after all, what did
it matter to him?  One's days were too brief to take the burden of
another's errors on one's shoulders.  Each man lived his own life and
paid his own price for living it.  The only pity was one had to pay so
often for a single fault.  One had to pay over and over again, indeed.
In her dealings with man, destiny never closed her accounts.

There are moments, psychologists tell us, when the passion for sin, or
for what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature that every fibre of
the body, as every cell of the brain, seems to be instinct with fearful
impulses.  Men and women at such moments lose the freedom of their
will.  They move to their terrible end as automatons move.  Choice is
taken from them, and conscience is either killed, or, if it lives at
all, lives but to give rebellion its fascination and disobedience its
charm.  For all sins, as theologians weary not of reminding us, are
sins of disobedience.  When that high spirit, that morning star of
evil, fell from heaven, it was as a rebel that he fell.

Callous, concentrated on evil, with stained mind, and soul hungry for
rebellion, Dorian Gray hastened on, quickening his step as he went, but
as he darted aside into a dim archway, that had served him often as a
short cut to the ill-famed place where he was going, he felt himself
suddenly seized from behind, and before he had time to defend himself,
he was thrust back against the wall, with a brutal hand round his
throat.

He struggled madly for life, and by a terrible effort wrenched the
tightening fingers away.  In a second he heard the click of a revolver,
and saw the gleam of a polished barrel, pointing straight at his head,
and the dusky form of a short, thick-set man facing him.

"What do you want?" he gasped.

"Keep quiet," said the man.  "If you stir, I shoot you."

"You are mad.  What have I done to you?"

"You wrecked the life of Sibyl Vane," was the answer, "and Sibyl Vane
was my sister.  She killed herself.  I know it.  Her death is at your
door.  I swore I would kill you in return.  For years I have sought
you.  I had no clue, no trace.  The two people who could have described
you were dead.  I knew nothing of you but the pet name she used to call
you.  I heard it to-night by chance.  Make your peace with God, for
to-night you are going to die."

Dorian Gray grew sick with fear.  "I never knew her," he stammered.  "I
never heard of her.  You are mad."

"You had better confess your sin, for as sure as I am James Vane, you
are going to die."  There was a horrible moment.  Dorian did not know
what to say or do.  "Down on your knees!" growled the man.  "I give you
one minute to make your peace--no more.  I go on board to-night for
India, and I must do my job first.  One minute.  That's all."

Dorian's arms fell to his side.  Paralysed with terror, he did not know
what to do.  Suddenly a wild hope flashed across his brain.  "Stop," he
cried.  "How long ago is it since your sister died?  Quick, tell me!"

"Eighteen years," said the man.  "Why do you ask me?  What do years
matter?"

"Eighteen years," laughed Dorian Gray, with a touch of triumph in his
voice.  "Eighteen years!  Set me under the lamp and look at my face!"

James Vane hesitated for a moment, not understanding what was meant.
Then he seized Dorian Gray and dragged him from the archway.

Dim and wavering as was the wind-blown light, yet it served to show him
the hideous error, as it seemed, into which he had fallen, for the face
of the man he had sought to kill had all the bloom of boyhood, all the
unstained purity of youth.  He seemed little more than a lad of twenty
summers, hardly older, if older indeed at all, than his sister had been
when they had parted so many years ago.  It was obvious that this was
not the man who had destroyed her life.

He loosened his hold and reeled back.  "My God! my God!" he cried, "and
I would have murdered you!"

Dorian Gray drew a long breath.  "You have been on the brink of
committing a terrible crime, my man," he said, looking at him sternly.
"Let this be a warning to you not to take vengeance into your own
hands."

"Forgive me, sir," muttered James Vane.  "I was deceived.  A chance
word I heard in that damned den set me on the wrong track."

"You had better go home and put that pistol away, or you may get into
trouble," said Dorian, turning on his heel and going slowly down the
street.

James Vane stood on the pavement in horror.  He was trembling from head
to foot.  After a little while, a black shadow that had been creeping
along the dripping wall moved out into the light and came close to him
with stealthy footsteps.  He felt a hand laid on his arm and looked
round with a start.  It was one of the women who had been drinking at
the bar.

"Why didn't you kill him?" she hissed out, putting haggard face quite
close to his.  "I knew you were following him when you rushed out from
Daly's. You fool!  You should have killed him.  He has lots of money,
and he's as bad as bad."

"He is not the man I am looking for," he answered, "and I want no man's
money.  I want a man's life.  The man whose life I want must be nearly
forty now.  This one is little more than a boy.  Thank God, I have not
got his blood upon my hands."

The woman gave a bitter laugh.  "Little more than a boy!" she sneered.
"Why, man, it's nigh on eighteen years since Prince Charming made me
what I am."

"You lie!" cried James Vane.

She raised her hand up to heaven.  "Before God I am telling the truth,"
she cried.

"Before God?"

"Strike me dumb if it ain't so.  He is the worst one that comes here.
They say he has sold himself to the devil for a pretty face.  It's nigh
on eighteen years since I met him.  He hasn't changed much since then.
I have, though," she added, with a sickly leer.

"You swear this?"

"I swear it," came in hoarse echo from her flat mouth.  "But don't give
me away to him," she whined; "I am afraid of him.  Let me have some
money for my night's lodging."

He broke from her with an oath and rushed to the corner of the street,
but Dorian Gray had disappeared.  When he looked back, the woman had
vanished also.



CHAPTER 17

A week later Dorian Gray was sitting in the conservatory at Selby
Royal, talking to the pretty Duchess of Monmouth, who with her husband,
a jaded-looking man of sixty, was amongst his guests.  It was tea-time,
and the mellow light of the huge, lace-covered lamp that stood on the
table lit up the delicate china and hammered silver of the service at
which the duchess was presiding.  Her white hands were moving daintily
among the cups, and her full red lips were smiling at something that
Dorian had whispered to her.  Lord Henry was lying back in a
silk-draped wicker chair, looking at them.  On a peach-coloured divan
sat Lady Narborough, pretending to listen to the duke's description of
the last Brazilian beetle that he had added to his collection.  Three
young men in elaborate smoking-suits were handing tea-cakes to some of
the women.  The house-party consisted of twelve people, and there were
more expected to arrive on the next day.

"What are you two talking about?" said Lord Henry, strolling over to
the table and putting his cup down.  "I hope Dorian has told you about
my plan for rechristening everything, Gladys.  It is a delightful idea."

"But I don't want to be rechristened, Harry," rejoined the duchess,
looking up at him with her wonderful eyes.  "I am quite satisfied with
my own name, and I am sure Mr. Gray should be satisfied with his."

"My dear Gladys, I would not alter either name for the world.  They are
both perfect.  I was thinking chiefly of flowers.  Yesterday I cut an
orchid, for my button-hole. It was a marvellous spotted thing, as
effective as the seven deadly sins.  In a thoughtless moment I asked
one of the gardeners what it was called.  He told me it was a fine
specimen of _Robinsoniana_, or something dreadful of that kind.  It is a
sad truth, but we have lost the faculty of giving lovely names to
things.  Names are everything.  I never quarrel with actions.  My one
quarrel is with words.  That is the reason I hate vulgar realism in
literature.  The man who could call a spade a spade should be compelled
to use one.  It is the only thing he is fit for."

"Then what should we call you, Harry?" she asked.

"His name is Prince Paradox," said Dorian.

"I recognize him in a flash," exclaimed the duchess.

"I won't hear of it," laughed Lord Henry, sinking into a chair.  "From
a label there is no escape!  I refuse the title."

"Royalties may not abdicate," fell as a warning from pretty lips.

"You wish me to defend my throne, then?"

"Yes."

"I give the truths of to-morrow."

"I prefer the mistakes of to-day," she answered.

"You disarm me, Gladys," he cried, catching the wilfulness of her mood.

"Of your shield, Harry, not of your spear."

"I never tilt against beauty," he said, with a wave of his hand.

"That is your error, Harry, believe me.  You value beauty far too much."

"How can you say that?  I admit that I think that it is better to be
beautiful than to be good.  But on the other hand, no one is more ready
than I am to acknowledge that it is better to be good than to be ugly."

"Ugliness is one of the seven deadly sins, then?" cried the duchess.
"What becomes of your simile about the orchid?"

"Ugliness is one of the seven deadly virtues, Gladys.  You, as a good
Tory, must not underrate them.  Beer, the Bible, and the seven deadly
virtues have made our England what she is."

"You don't like your country, then?" she asked.

"I live in it."

"That you may censure it the better."

"Would you have me take the verdict of Europe on it?" he inquired.

"What do they say of us?"

"That Tartuffe has emigrated to England and opened a shop."

"Is that yours, Harry?"

"I give it to you."

"I could not use it.  It is too true."

"You need not be afraid.  Our countrymen never recognize a description."

"They are practical."

"They are more cunning than practical.  When they make up their ledger,
they balance stupidity by wealth, and vice by hypocrisy."

"Still, we have done great things."

"Great things have been thrust on us, Gladys."

"We have carried their burden."

"Only as far as the Stock Exchange."

She shook her head.  "I believe in the race," she cried.

"It represents the survival of the pushing."

"It has development."

"Decay fascinates me more."

"What of art?" she asked.

"It is a malady."

"Love?"

"An illusion."

"Religion?"

"The fashionable substitute for belief."

"You are a sceptic."

"Never!  Scepticism is the beginning of faith."

"What are you?"

"To define is to limit."

"Give me a clue."

"Threads snap.  You would lose your way in the labyrinth."

"You bewilder me.  Let us talk of some one else."

"Our host is a delightful topic.  Years ago he was christened Prince
Charming."

"Ah! don't remind me of that," cried Dorian Gray.

"Our host is rather horrid this evening," answered the duchess,
colouring.  "I believe he thinks that Monmouth married me on purely
scientific principles as the best specimen he could find of a modern
butterfly."

"Well, I hope he won't stick pins into you, Duchess," laughed Dorian.

"Oh! my maid does that already, Mr. Gray, when she is annoyed with me."

"And what does she get annoyed with you about, Duchess?"

"For the most trivial things, Mr. Gray, I assure you.  Usually because
I come in at ten minutes to nine and tell her that I must be dressed by
half-past eight."

"How unreasonable of her!  You should give her warning."

"I daren't, Mr. Gray.  Why, she invents hats for me.  You remember the
one I wore at Lady Hilstone's garden-party?  You don't, but it is nice
of you to pretend that you do.  Well, she made it out of nothing.  All
good hats are made out of nothing."

"Like all good reputations, Gladys," interrupted Lord Henry.  "Every
effect that one produces gives one an enemy.  To be popular one must be
a mediocrity."

"Not with women," said the duchess, shaking her head; "and women rule
the world.  I assure you we can't bear mediocrities.  We women, as some
one says, love with our ears, just as you men love with your eyes, if
you ever love at all."

"It seems to me that we never do anything else," murmured Dorian.

"Ah! then, you never really love, Mr. Gray," answered the duchess with
mock sadness.

"My dear Gladys!" cried Lord Henry.  "How can you say that?  Romance
lives by repetition, and repetition converts an appetite into an art.
Besides, each time that one loves is the only time one has ever loved.
Difference of object does not alter singleness of passion.  It merely
intensifies it.  We can have in life but one great experience at best,
and the secret of life is to reproduce that experience as often as
possible."

"Even when one has been wounded by it, Harry?" asked the duchess after
a pause.

"Especially when one has been wounded by it," answered Lord Henry.

The duchess turned and looked at Dorian Gray with a curious expression
in her eyes.  "What do you say to that, Mr. Gray?" she inquired.

Dorian hesitated for a moment.  Then he threw his head back and
laughed.  "I always agree with Harry, Duchess."

"Even when he is wrong?"

"Harry is never wrong, Duchess."

"And does his philosophy make you happy?"

"I have never searched for happiness.  Who wants happiness?  I have
searched for pleasure."

"And found it, Mr. Gray?"

"Often.  Too often."

The duchess sighed.  "I am searching for peace," she said, "and if I
don't go and dress, I shall have none this evening."

"Let me get you some orchids, Duchess," cried Dorian, starting to his
feet and walking down the conservatory.

"You are flirting disgracefully with him," said Lord Henry to his
cousin.  "You had better take care.  He is very fascinating."

"If he were not, there would be no battle."

"Greek meets Greek, then?"

"I am on the side of the Trojans.  They fought for a woman."

"They were defeated."

"There are worse things than capture," she answered.

"You gallop with a loose rein."

"Pace gives life," was the _riposte_.

"I shall write it in my diary to-night."

"What?"

"That a burnt child loves the fire."

"I am not even singed.  My wings are untouched."

"You use them for everything, except flight."

"Courage has passed from men to women.  It is a new experience for us."

"You have a rival."

"Who?"

He laughed.  "Lady Narborough," he whispered.  "She perfectly adores
him."

"You fill me with apprehension.  The appeal to antiquity is fatal to us
who are romanticists."

"Romanticists!  You have all the methods of science."

"Men have educated us."

"But not explained you."

"Describe us as a sex," was her challenge.

"Sphinxes without secrets."

She looked at him, smiling.  "How long Mr. Gray is!" she said.  "Let us
go and help him.  I have not yet told him the colour of my frock."

"Ah! you must suit your frock to his flowers, Gladys."

"That would be a premature surrender."

"Romantic art begins with its climax."

"I must keep an opportunity for retreat."

"In the Parthian manner?"

"They found safety in the desert.  I could not do that."

"Women are not always allowed a choice," he answered, but hardly had he
finished the sentence before from the far end of the conservatory came
a stifled groan, followed by the dull sound of a heavy fall.  Everybody
started up.  The duchess stood motionless in horror.  And with fear in
his eyes, Lord Henry rushed through the flapping palms to find Dorian
Gray lying face downwards on the tiled floor in a deathlike swoon.

He was carried at once into the blue drawing-room and laid upon one of
the sofas.  After a short time, he came to himself and looked round
with a dazed expression.

"What has happened?" he asked.  "Oh!  I remember.  Am I safe here,
Harry?" He began to tremble.

"My dear Dorian," answered Lord Henry, "you merely fainted.  That was
all.  You must have overtired yourself.  You had better not come down
to dinner.  I will take your place."

"No, I will come down," he said, struggling to his feet.  "I would
rather come down.  I must not be alone."

He went to his room and dressed.  There was a wild recklessness of
gaiety in his manner as he sat at table, but now and then a thrill of
terror ran through him when he remembered that, pressed against the
window of the conservatory, like a white handkerchief, he had seen the
face of James Vane watching him.



CHAPTER 18

The next day he did not leave the house, and, indeed, spent most of the
time in his own room, sick with a wild terror of dying, and yet
indifferent to life itself.  The consciousness of being hunted, snared,
tracked down, had begun to dominate him.  If the tapestry did but
tremble in the wind, he shook.  The dead leaves that were blown against
the leaded panes seemed to him like his own wasted resolutions and wild
regrets.  When he closed his eyes, he saw again the sailor's face
peering through the mist-stained glass, and horror seemed once more to
lay its hand upon his heart.

But perhaps it had been only his fancy that had called vengeance out of
the night and set the hideous shapes of punishment before him.  Actual
life was chaos, but there was something terribly logical in the
imagination.  It was the imagination that set remorse to dog the feet
of sin.  It was the imagination that made each crime bear its misshapen
brood.  In the common world of fact the wicked were not punished, nor
the good rewarded.  Success was given to the strong, failure thrust
upon the weak.  That was all.  Besides, had any stranger been prowling
round the house, he would have been seen by the servants or the
keepers.  Had any foot-marks been found on the flower-beds, the
gardeners would have reported it.  Yes, it had been merely fancy.
Sibyl Vane's brother had not come back to kill him.  He had sailed away
in his ship to founder in some winter sea.  From him, at any rate, he
was safe.  Why, the man did not know who he was, could not know who he
was.  The mask of youth had saved him.

And yet if it had been merely an illusion, how terrible it was to think
that conscience could raise such fearful phantoms, and give them
visible form, and make them move before one!  What sort of life would
his be if, day and night, shadows of his crime were to peer at him from
silent corners, to mock him from secret places, to whisper in his ear
as he sat at the feast, to wake him with icy fingers as he lay asleep!
As the thought crept through his brain, he grew pale with terror, and
the air seemed to him to have become suddenly colder.  Oh! in what a
wild hour of madness he had killed his friend!  How ghastly the mere
memory of the scene!  He saw it all again.  Each hideous detail came
back to him with added horror.  Out of the black cave of time, terrible
and swathed in scarlet, rose the image of his sin.  When Lord Henry
came in at six o'clock, he found him crying as one whose heart will
break.

It was not till the third day that he ventured to go out.  There was
something in the clear, pine-scented air of that winter morning that
seemed to bring him back his joyousness and his ardour for life.  But
it was not merely the physical conditions of environment that had
caused the change.  His own nature had revolted against the excess of
anguish that had sought to maim and mar the perfection of its calm.
With subtle and finely wrought temperaments it is always so.  Their
strong passions must either bruise or bend.  They either slay the man,
or themselves die.  Shallow sorrows and shallow loves live on.  The
loves and sorrows that are great are destroyed by their own plenitude.
Besides, he had convinced himself that he had been the victim of a
terror-stricken imagination, and looked back now on his fears with
something of pity and not a little of contempt.

After breakfast, he walked with the duchess for an hour in the garden
and then drove across the park to join the shooting-party. The crisp
frost lay like salt upon the grass.  The sky was an inverted cup of
blue metal.  A thin film of ice bordered the flat, reed-grown lake.

At the corner of the pine-wood he caught sight of Sir Geoffrey
Clouston, the duchess's brother, jerking two spent cartridges out of
his gun.  He jumped from the cart, and having told the groom to take
the mare home, made his way towards his guest through the withered
bracken and rough undergrowth.

"Have you had good sport, Geoffrey?" he asked.

"Not very good, Dorian.  I think most of the birds have gone to the
open.  I dare say it will be better after lunch, when we get to new
ground."

Dorian strolled along by his side.  The keen aromatic air, the brown
and red lights that glimmered in the wood, the hoarse cries of the
beaters ringing out from time to time, and the sharp snaps of the guns
that followed, fascinated him and filled him with a sense of delightful
freedom.  He was dominated by the carelessness of happiness, by the
high indifference of joy.

Suddenly from a lumpy tussock of old grass some twenty yards in front
of them, with black-tipped ears erect and long hinder limbs throwing it
forward, started a hare.  It bolted for a thicket of alders.  Sir
Geoffrey put his gun to his shoulder, but there was something in the
animal's grace of movement that strangely charmed Dorian Gray, and he
cried out at once, "Don't shoot it, Geoffrey.  Let it live."

"What nonsense, Dorian!" laughed his companion, and as the hare bounded
into the thicket, he fired.  There were two cries heard, the cry of a
hare in pain, which is dreadful, the cry of a man in agony, which is
worse.

"Good heavens!  I have hit a beater!" exclaimed Sir Geoffrey.  "What an
ass the man was to get in front of the guns!  Stop shooting there!" he
called out at the top of his voice.  "A man is hurt."

The head-keeper came running up with a stick in his hand.

"Where, sir?  Where is he?" he shouted.  At the same time, the firing
ceased along the line.

"Here," answered Sir Geoffrey angrily, hurrying towards the thicket.
"Why on earth don't you keep your men back?  Spoiled my shooting for
the day."

Dorian watched them as they plunged into the alder-clump, brushing the
lithe swinging branches aside.  In a few moments they emerged, dragging
a body after them into the sunlight.  He turned away in horror.  It
seemed to him that misfortune followed wherever he went.  He heard Sir
Geoffrey ask if the man was really dead, and the affirmative answer of
the keeper.  The wood seemed to him to have become suddenly alive with
faces.  There was the trampling of myriad feet and the low buzz of
voices.  A great copper-breasted pheasant came beating through the
boughs overhead.

After a few moments--that were to him, in his perturbed state, like
endless hours of pain--he felt a hand laid on his shoulder.  He started
and looked round.

"Dorian," said Lord Henry, "I had better tell them that the shooting is
stopped for to-day. It would not look well to go on."

"I wish it were stopped for ever, Harry," he answered bitterly.  "The
whole thing is hideous and cruel.  Is the man ...?"

He could not finish the sentence.

"I am afraid so," rejoined Lord Henry.  "He got the whole charge of
shot in his chest.  He must have died almost instantaneously.  Come;
let us go home."

They walked side by side in the direction of the avenue for nearly
fifty yards without speaking.  Then Dorian looked at Lord Henry and
said, with a heavy sigh, "It is a bad omen, Harry, a very bad omen."

"What is?" asked Lord Henry.  "Oh! this accident, I suppose.  My dear
fellow, it can't be helped.  It was the man's own fault.  Why did he
get in front of the guns?  Besides, it is nothing to us.  It is rather
awkward for Geoffrey, of course.  It does not do to pepper beaters.  It
makes people think that one is a wild shot.  And Geoffrey is not; he
shoots very straight.  But there is no use talking about the matter."

Dorian shook his head.  "It is a bad omen, Harry.  I feel as if
something horrible were going to happen to some of us.  To myself,
perhaps," he added, passing his hand over his eyes, with a gesture of
pain.

The elder man laughed.  "The only horrible thing in the world is _ennui_,
Dorian.  That is the one sin for which there is no forgiveness.  But we
are not likely to suffer from it unless these fellows keep chattering
about this thing at dinner.  I must tell them that the subject is to be
tabooed.  As for omens, there is no such thing as an omen.  Destiny
does not send us heralds.  She is too wise or too cruel for that.
Besides, what on earth could happen to you, Dorian?  You have
everything in the world that a man can want.  There is no one who would
not be delighted to change places with you."

"There is no one with whom I would not change places, Harry.  Don't
laugh like that.  I am telling you the truth.  The wretched peasant who
has just died is better off than I am.  I have no terror of death.  It
is the coming of death that terrifies me.  Its monstrous wings seem to
wheel in the leaden air around me.  Good heavens! don't you see a man
moving behind the trees there, watching me, waiting for me?"

Lord Henry looked in the direction in which the trembling gloved hand
was pointing.  "Yes," he said, smiling, "I see the gardener waiting for
you.  I suppose he wants to ask you what flowers you wish to have on
the table to-night. How absurdly nervous you are, my dear fellow!  You
must come and see my doctor, when we get back to town."

Dorian heaved a sigh of relief as he saw the gardener approaching.  The
man touched his hat, glanced for a moment at Lord Henry in a hesitating
manner, and then produced a letter, which he handed to his master.
"Her Grace told me to wait for an answer," he murmured.

Dorian put the letter into his pocket.  "Tell her Grace that I am
coming in," he said, coldly.  The man turned round and went rapidly in
the direction of the house.

"How fond women are of doing dangerous things!" laughed Lord Henry.
"It is one of the qualities in them that I admire most.  A woman will
flirt with anybody in the world as long as other people are looking on."

"How fond you are of saying dangerous things, Harry!  In the present
instance, you are quite astray.  I like the duchess very much, but I
don't love her."

"And the duchess loves you very much, but she likes you less, so you
are excellently matched."

"You are talking scandal, Harry, and there is never any basis for
scandal."

"The basis of every scandal is an immoral certainty," said Lord Henry,
lighting a cigarette.

"You would sacrifice anybody, Harry, for the sake of an epigram."

"The world goes to the altar of its own accord," was the answer.

"I wish I could love," cried Dorian Gray with a deep note of pathos in
his voice.  "But I seem to have lost the passion and forgotten the
desire.  I am too much concentrated on myself.  My own personality has
become a burden to me.  I want to escape, to go away, to forget.  It
was silly of me to come down here at all.  I think I shall send a wire
to Harvey to have the yacht got ready.  On a yacht one is safe."

"Safe from what, Dorian?  You are in some trouble.  Why not tell me
what it is?  You know I would help you."

"I can't tell you, Harry," he answered sadly.  "And I dare say it is
only a fancy of mine.  This unfortunate accident has upset me.  I have
a horrible presentiment that something of the kind may happen to me."

"What nonsense!"

"I hope it is, but I can't help feeling it.  Ah! here is the duchess,
looking like Artemis in a tailor-made gown.  You see we have come back,
Duchess."

"I have heard all about it, Mr. Gray," she answered.  "Poor Geoffrey is
terribly upset.  And it seems that you asked him not to shoot the hare.
How curious!"

"Yes, it was very curious.  I don't know what made me say it.  Some
whim, I suppose.  It looked the loveliest of little live things.  But I
am sorry they told you about the man.  It is a hideous subject."

"It is an annoying subject," broke in Lord Henry.  "It has no
psychological value at all.  Now if Geoffrey had done the thing on
purpose, how interesting he would be!  I should like to know some one
who had committed a real murder."

"How horrid of you, Harry!" cried the duchess.  "Isn't it, Mr. Gray?
Harry, Mr. Gray is ill again.  He is going to faint."

Dorian drew himself up with an effort and smiled.  "It is nothing,
Duchess," he murmured; "my nerves are dreadfully out of order.  That is
all.  I am afraid I walked too far this morning.  I didn't hear what
Harry said.  Was it very bad?  You must tell me some other time.  I
think I must go and lie down.  You will excuse me, won't you?"

They had reached the great flight of steps that led from the
conservatory on to the terrace.  As the glass door closed behind
Dorian, Lord Henry turned and looked at the duchess with his slumberous
eyes.  "Are you very much in love with him?" he asked.

She did not answer for some time, but stood gazing at the landscape.
"I wish I knew," she said at last.

He shook his head.  "Knowledge would be fatal.  It is the uncertainty
that charms one.  A mist makes things wonderful."

"One may lose one's way."

"All ways end at the same point, my dear Gladys."

"What is that?"

"Disillusion."

"It was my _debut_ in life," she sighed.

"It came to you crowned."

"I am tired of strawberry leaves."

"They become you."

"Only in public."

"You would miss them," said Lord Henry.

"I will not part with a petal."

"Monmouth has ears."

"Old age is dull of hearing."

"Has he never been jealous?"

"I wish he had been."

He glanced about as if in search of something.  "What are you looking
for?" she inquired.

"The button from your foil," he answered.  "You have dropped it."

She laughed.  "I have still the mask."

"It makes your eyes lovelier," was his reply.

She laughed again.  Her teeth showed like white seeds in a scarlet
fruit.

Upstairs, in his own room, Dorian Gray was lying on a sofa, with terror
in every tingling fibre of his body.  Life had suddenly become too
hideous a burden for him to bear.  The dreadful death of the unlucky
beater, shot in the thicket like a wild animal, had seemed to him to
pre-figure death for himself also.  He had nearly swooned at what Lord
Henry had said in a chance mood of cynical jesting.

At five o'clock he rang his bell for his servant and gave him orders to
pack his things for the night-express to town, and to have the brougham
at the door by eight-thirty. He was determined not to sleep another
night at Selby Royal.  It was an ill-omened place.  Death walked there
in the sunlight.  The grass of the forest had been spotted with blood.

Then he wrote a note to Lord Henry, telling him that he was going up to
town to consult his doctor and asking him to entertain his guests in
his absence.  As he was putting it into the envelope, a knock came to
the door, and his valet informed him that the head-keeper wished to see
him.  He frowned and bit his lip.  "Send him in," he muttered, after
some moments' hesitation.

As soon as the man entered, Dorian pulled his chequebook out of a
drawer and spread it out before him.

"I suppose you have come about the unfortunate accident of this
morning, Thornton?" he said, taking up a pen.

"Yes, sir," answered the gamekeeper.

"Was the poor fellow married?  Had he any people dependent on him?"
asked Dorian, looking bored.  "If so, I should not like them to be left
in want, and will send them any sum of money you may think necessary."

"We don't know who he is, sir.  That is what I took the liberty of
coming to you about."

"Don't know who he is?" said Dorian, listlessly.  "What do you mean?
Wasn't he one of your men?"

"No, sir.  Never saw him before.  Seems like a sailor, sir."

The pen dropped from Dorian Gray's hand, and he felt as if his heart
had suddenly stopped beating.  "A sailor?" he cried out.  "Did you say
a sailor?"

"Yes, sir.  He looks as if he had been a sort of sailor; tattooed on
both arms, and that kind of thing."

"Was there anything found on him?" said Dorian, leaning forward and
looking at the man with startled eyes.  "Anything that would tell his
name?"

"Some money, sir--not much, and a six-shooter. There was no name of any
kind.  A decent-looking man, sir, but rough-like. A sort of sailor we
think."

Dorian started to his feet.  A terrible hope fluttered past him.  He
clutched at it madly.  "Where is the body?" he exclaimed.  "Quick!  I
must see it at once."

"It is in an empty stable in the Home Farm, sir.  The folk don't like
to have that sort of thing in their houses.  They say a corpse brings
bad luck."

"The Home Farm!  Go there at once and meet me.  Tell one of the grooms
to bring my horse round.  No. Never mind.  I'll go to the stables
myself.  It will save time."

In less than a quarter of an hour, Dorian Gray was galloping down the
long avenue as hard as he could go.  The trees seemed to sweep past him
in spectral procession, and wild shadows to fling themselves across his
path.  Once the mare swerved at a white gate-post and nearly threw him.
He lashed her across the neck with his crop.  She cleft the dusky air
like an arrow.  The stones flew from her hoofs.

At last he reached the Home Farm.  Two men were loitering in the yard.
He leaped from the saddle and threw the reins to one of them.  In the
farthest stable a light was glimmering.  Something seemed to tell him
that the body was there, and he hurried to the door and put his hand
upon the latch.

There he paused for a moment, feeling that he was on the brink of a
discovery that would either make or mar his life.  Then he thrust the
door open and entered.

On a heap of sacking in the far corner was lying the dead body of a man
dressed in a coarse shirt and a pair of blue trousers.  A spotted
handkerchief had been placed over the face.  A coarse candle, stuck in
a bottle, sputtered beside it.

Dorian Gray shuddered.  He felt that his could not be the hand to take
the handkerchief away, and called out to one of the farm-servants to
come to him.

"Take that thing off the face.  I wish to see it," he said, clutching
at the door-post for support.

When the farm-servant had done so, he stepped forward.  A cry of joy
broke from his lips.  The man who had been shot in the thicket was
James Vane.

He stood there for some minutes looking at the dead body.  As he rode
home, his eyes were full of tears, for he knew he was safe.



CHAPTER 19

"There is no use your telling me that you are going to be good," cried
Lord Henry, dipping his white fingers into a red copper bowl filled
with rose-water. "You are quite perfect.  Pray, don't change."

Dorian Gray shook his head.  "No, Harry, I have done too many dreadful
things in my life.  I am not going to do any more.  I began my good
actions yesterday."

"Where were you yesterday?"

"In the country, Harry.  I was staying at a little inn by myself."

"My dear boy," said Lord Henry, smiling, "anybody can be good in the
country.  There are no temptations there.  That is the reason why
people who live out of town are so absolutely uncivilized.
Civilization is not by any means an easy thing to attain to.  There are
only two ways by which man can reach it.  One is by being cultured, the
other by being corrupt.  Country people have no opportunity of being
either, so they stagnate."

"Culture and corruption," echoed Dorian.  "I have known something of
both.  It seems terrible to me now that they should ever be found
together.  For I have a new ideal, Harry.  I am going to alter.  I
think I have altered."

"You have not yet told me what your good action was.  Or did you say
you had done more than one?" asked his companion as he spilled into his
plate a little crimson pyramid of seeded strawberries and, through a
perforated, shell-shaped spoon, snowed white sugar upon them.

"I can tell you, Harry.  It is not a story I could tell to any one
else.  I spared somebody.  It sounds vain, but you understand what I
mean.  She was quite beautiful and wonderfully like Sibyl Vane.  I
think it was that which first attracted me to her.  You remember Sibyl,
don't you?  How long ago that seems!  Well, Hetty was not one of our
own class, of course.  She was simply a girl in a village.  But I
really loved her.  I am quite sure that I loved her.  All during this
wonderful May that we have been having, I used to run down and see her
two or three times a week.  Yesterday she met me in a little orchard.
The apple-blossoms kept tumbling down on her hair, and she was
laughing.  We were to have gone away together this morning at dawn.
Suddenly I determined to leave her as flowerlike as I had found her."

"I should think the novelty of the emotion must have given you a thrill
of real pleasure, Dorian," interrupted Lord Henry.  "But I can finish
your idyll for you.  You gave her good advice and broke her heart.
That was the beginning of your reformation."

"Harry, you are horrible!  You mustn't say these dreadful things.
Hetty's heart is not broken.  Of course, she cried and all that.  But
there is no disgrace upon her.  She can live, like Perdita, in her
garden of mint and marigold."

"And weep over a faithless Florizel," said Lord Henry, laughing, as he
leaned back in his chair.  "My dear Dorian, you have the most curiously
boyish moods.  Do you think this girl will ever be really content now
with any one of her own rank?  I suppose she will be married some day
to a rough carter or a grinning ploughman.  Well, the fact of having
met you, and loved you, will teach her to despise her husband, and she
will be wretched.  From a moral point of view, I cannot say that I
think much of your great renunciation.  Even as a beginning, it is
poor.  Besides, how do you know that Hetty isn't floating at the
present moment in some starlit mill-pond, with lovely water-lilies
round her, like Ophelia?"

"I can't bear this, Harry!  You mock at everything, and then suggest
the most serious tragedies.  I am sorry I told you now.  I don't care
what you say to me.  I know I was right in acting as I did.  Poor
Hetty!  As I rode past the farm this morning, I saw her white face at
the window, like a spray of jasmine.  Don't let us talk about it any
more, and don't try to persuade me that the first good action I have
done for years, the first little bit of self-sacrifice I have ever
known, is really a sort of sin.  I want to be better.  I am going to be
better.  Tell me something about yourself.  What is going on in town?
I have not been to the club for days."

"The people are still discussing poor Basil's disappearance."

"I should have thought they had got tired of that by this time," said
Dorian, pouring himself out some wine and frowning slightly.

"My dear boy, they have only been talking about it for six weeks, and
the British public are really not equal to the mental strain of having
more than one topic every three months.  They have been very fortunate
lately, however.  They have had my own divorce-case and Alan Campbell's
suicide.  Now they have got the mysterious disappearance of an artist.
Scotland Yard still insists that the man in the grey ulster who left
for Paris by the midnight train on the ninth of November was poor
Basil, and the French police declare that Basil never arrived in Paris
at all.  I suppose in about a fortnight we shall be told that he has
been seen in San Francisco.  It is an odd thing, but every one who
disappears is said to be seen at San Francisco.  It must be a
delightful city, and possess all the attractions of the next world."

"What do you think has happened to Basil?" asked Dorian, holding up his
Burgundy against the light and wondering how it was that he could
discuss the matter so calmly.

"I have not the slightest idea.  If Basil chooses to hide himself, it
is no business of mine.  If he is dead, I don't want to think about
him.  Death is the only thing that ever terrifies me.  I hate it."

"Why?" said the younger man wearily.

"Because," said Lord Henry, passing beneath his nostrils the gilt
trellis of an open vinaigrette box, "one can survive everything
nowadays except that.  Death and vulgarity are the only two facts in
the nineteenth century that one cannot explain away.  Let us have our
coffee in the music-room, Dorian.  You must play Chopin to me.  The man
with whom my wife ran away played Chopin exquisitely.  Poor Victoria!
I was very fond of her.  The house is rather lonely without her.  Of
course, married life is merely a habit, a bad habit.  But then one
regrets the loss even of one's worst habits.  Perhaps one regrets them
the most.  They are such an essential part of one's personality."

Dorian said nothing, but rose from the table, and passing into the next
room, sat down to the piano and let his fingers stray across the white
and black ivory of the keys.  After the coffee had been brought in, he
stopped, and looking over at Lord Henry, said, "Harry, did it ever
occur to you that Basil was murdered?"

Lord Henry yawned.  "Basil was very popular, and always wore a
Waterbury watch.  Why should he have been murdered?  He was not clever
enough to have enemies.  Of course, he had a wonderful genius for
painting.  But a man can paint like Velasquez and yet be as dull as
possible.  Basil was really rather dull.  He only interested me once,
and that was when he told me, years ago, that he had a wild adoration
for you and that you were the dominant motive of his art."

"I was very fond of Basil," said Dorian with a note of sadness in his
voice.  "But don't people say that he was murdered?"

"Oh, some of the papers do.  It does not seem to me to be at all
probable.  I know there are dreadful places in Paris, but Basil was not
the sort of man to have gone to them.  He had no curiosity.  It was his
chief defect."

"What would you say, Harry, if I told you that I had murdered Basil?"
said the younger man.  He watched him intently after he had spoken.

"I would say, my dear fellow, that you were posing for a character that
doesn't suit you.  All crime is vulgar, just as all vulgarity is crime.
It is not in you, Dorian, to commit a murder.  I am sorry if I hurt
your vanity by saying so, but I assure you it is true.  Crime belongs
exclusively to the lower orders.  I don't blame them in the smallest
degree.  I should fancy that crime was to them what art is to us,
simply a method of procuring extraordinary sensations."

"A method of procuring sensations?  Do you think, then, that a man who
has once committed a murder could possibly do the same crime again?
Don't tell me that."

"Oh! anything becomes a pleasure if one does it too often," cried Lord
Henry, laughing.  "That is one of the most important secrets of life.
I should fancy, however, that murder is always a mistake.  One should
never do anything that one cannot talk about after dinner.  But let us
pass from poor Basil.  I wish I could believe that he had come to such
a really romantic end as you suggest, but I can't. I dare say he fell
into the Seine off an omnibus and that the conductor hushed up the
scandal.  Yes:  I should fancy that was his end.  I see him lying now
on his back under those dull-green waters, with the heavy barges
floating over him and long weeds catching in his hair.  Do you know, I
don't think he would have done much more good work.  During the last
ten years his painting had gone off very much."

Dorian heaved a sigh, and Lord Henry strolled across the room and began
to stroke the head of a curious Java parrot, a large, grey-plumaged
bird with pink crest and tail, that was balancing itself upon a bamboo
perch.  As his pointed fingers touched it, it dropped the white scurf
of crinkled lids over black, glasslike eyes and began to sway backwards
and forwards.

"Yes," he continued, turning round and taking his handkerchief out of
his pocket; "his painting had quite gone off.  It seemed to me to have
lost something.  It had lost an ideal.  When you and he ceased to be
great friends, he ceased to be a great artist.  What was it separated
you?  I suppose he bored you.  If so, he never forgave you.  It's a
habit bores have.  By the way, what has become of that wonderful
portrait he did of you?  I don't think I have ever seen it since he
finished it.  Oh!  I remember your telling me years ago that you had
sent it down to Selby, and that it had got mislaid or stolen on the
way.  You never got it back?  What a pity! it was really a
masterpiece.  I remember I wanted to buy it.  I wish I had now.  It
belonged to Basil's best period.  Since then, his work was that curious
mixture of bad painting and good intentions that always entitles a man
to be called a representative British artist.  Did you advertise for
it?  You should."

"I forget," said Dorian.  "I suppose I did.  But I never really liked
it.  I am sorry I sat for it.  The memory of the thing is hateful to
me.  Why do you talk of it?  It used to remind me of those curious
lines in some play--Hamlet, I think--how do they run?--

    "Like the painting of a sorrow,
     A face without a heart."

Yes:  that is what it was like."

Lord Henry laughed.  "If a man treats life artistically, his brain is
his heart," he answered, sinking into an arm-chair.

Dorian Gray shook his head and struck some soft chords on the piano.
"'Like the painting of a sorrow,'" he repeated, "'a face without a
heart.'"

The elder man lay back and looked at him with half-closed eyes.  "By
the way, Dorian," he said after a pause, "'what does it profit a man if
he gain the whole world and lose--how does the quotation run?--his own
soul'?"

The music jarred, and Dorian Gray started and stared at his friend.
"Why do you ask me that, Harry?"

"My dear fellow," said Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows in surprise,
"I asked you because I thought you might be able to give me an answer.
That is all.  I was going through the park last Sunday, and close by
the Marble Arch there stood a little crowd of shabby-looking people
listening to some vulgar street-preacher. As I passed by, I heard the
man yelling out that question to his audience.  It struck me as being
rather dramatic.  London is very rich in curious effects of that kind.
A wet Sunday, an uncouth Christian in a mackintosh, a ring of sickly
white faces under a broken roof of dripping umbrellas, and a wonderful
phrase flung into the air by shrill hysterical lips--it was really very
good in its way, quite a suggestion.  I thought of telling the prophet
that art had a soul, but that man had not.  I am afraid, however, he
would not have understood me."

"Don't, Harry.  The soul is a terrible reality.  It can be bought, and
sold, and bartered away.  It can be poisoned, or made perfect.  There
is a soul in each one of us.  I know it."

"Do you feel quite sure of that, Dorian?"

"Quite sure."

"Ah! then it must be an illusion.  The things one feels absolutely
certain about are never true.  That is the fatality of faith, and the
lesson of romance.  How grave you are!  Don't be so serious.  What have
you or I to do with the superstitions of our age?  No:  we have given
up our belief in the soul.  Play me something.  Play me a nocturne,
Dorian, and, as you play, tell me, in a low voice, how you have kept
your youth.  You must have some secret.  I am only ten years older than
you are, and I am wrinkled, and worn, and yellow.  You are really
wonderful, Dorian.  You have never looked more charming than you do
to-night. You remind me of the day I saw you first.  You were rather
cheeky, very shy, and absolutely extraordinary.  You have changed, of
course, but not in appearance.  I wish you would tell me your secret.
To get back my youth I would do anything in the world, except take
exercise, get up early, or be respectable.  Youth!  There is nothing
like it.  It's absurd to talk of the ignorance of youth.  The only
people to whose opinions I listen now with any respect are people much
younger than myself.  They seem in front of me.  Life has revealed to
them her latest wonder.  As for the aged, I always contradict the aged.
I do it on principle.  If you ask them their opinion on something that
happened yesterday, they solemnly give you the opinions current in
1820, when people wore high stocks, believed in everything, and knew
absolutely nothing.  How lovely that thing you are playing is!  I
wonder, did Chopin write it at Majorca, with the sea weeping round the
villa and the salt spray dashing against the panes?  It is marvellously
romantic.  What a blessing it is that there is one art left to us that
is not imitative!  Don't stop.  I want music to-night. It seems to me
that you are the young Apollo and that I am Marsyas listening to you.
I have sorrows, Dorian, of my own, that even you know nothing of.  The
tragedy of old age is not that one is old, but that one is young.  I am
amazed sometimes at my own sincerity.  Ah, Dorian, how happy you are!
What an exquisite life you have had!  You have drunk deeply of
everything.  You have crushed the grapes against your palate.  Nothing
has been hidden from you.  And it has all been to you no more than the
sound of music.  It has not marred you.  You are still the same."

"I am not the same, Harry."

"Yes, you are the same.  I wonder what the rest of your life will be.
Don't spoil it by renunciations.  At present you are a perfect type.
Don't make yourself incomplete.  You are quite flawless now.  You need
not shake your head:  you know you are.  Besides, Dorian, don't deceive
yourself.  Life is not governed by will or intention.  Life is a
question of nerves, and fibres, and slowly built-up cells in which
thought hides itself and passion has its dreams.  You may fancy
yourself safe and think yourself strong.  But a chance tone of colour
in a room or a morning sky, a particular perfume that you had once
loved and that brings subtle memories with it, a line from a forgotten
poem that you had come across again, a cadence from a piece of music
that you had ceased to play--I tell you, Dorian, that it is on things
like these that our lives depend.  Browning writes about that
somewhere; but our own senses will imagine them for us.  There are
moments when the odour of _lilas blanc_ passes suddenly across me, and I
have to live the strangest month of my life over again.  I wish I could
change places with you, Dorian.  The world has cried out against us
both, but it has always worshipped you.  It always will worship you.
You are the type of what the age is searching for, and what it is
afraid it has found.  I am so glad that you have never done anything,
never carved a statue, or painted a picture, or produced anything
outside of yourself!  Life has been your art.  You have set yourself to
music.  Your days are your sonnets."

Dorian rose up from the piano and passed his hand through his hair.
"Yes, life has been exquisite," he murmured, "but I am not going to
have the same life, Harry.  And you must not say these extravagant
things to me.  You don't know everything about me.  I think that if you
did, even you would turn from me.  You laugh.  Don't laugh."

"Why have you stopped playing, Dorian?  Go back and give me the
nocturne over again.  Look at that great, honey-coloured moon that
hangs in the dusky air.  She is waiting for you to charm her, and if
you play she will come closer to the earth.  You won't?  Let us go to
the club, then.  It has been a charming evening, and we must end it
charmingly.  There is some one at White's who wants immensely to know
you--young Lord Poole, Bournemouth's eldest son.  He has already copied
your neckties, and has begged me to introduce him to you.  He is quite
delightful and rather reminds me of you."

"I hope not," said Dorian with a sad look in his eyes.  "But I am tired
to-night, Harry.  I shan't go to the club.  It is nearly eleven, and I
want to go to bed early."

"Do stay.  You have never played so well as to-night. There was
something in your touch that was wonderful.  It had more expression
than I had ever heard from it before."

"It is because I am going to be good," he answered, smiling.  "I am a
little changed already."

"You cannot change to me, Dorian," said Lord Henry.  "You and I will
always be friends."

"Yet you poisoned me with a book once.  I should not forgive that.
Harry, promise me that you will never lend that book to any one.  It
does harm."

"My dear boy, you are really beginning to moralize.  You will soon be
going about like the converted, and the revivalist, warning people
against all the sins of which you have grown tired.  You are much too
delightful to do that.  Besides, it is no use.  You and I are what we
are, and will be what we will be.  As for being poisoned by a book,
there is no such thing as that.  Art has no influence upon action.  It
annihilates the desire to act.  It is superbly sterile.  The books that
the world calls immoral are books that show the world its own shame.
That is all.  But we won't discuss literature.  Come round to-morrow. I
am going to ride at eleven.  We might go together, and I will take you
to lunch afterwards with Lady Branksome.  She is a charming woman, and
wants to consult you about some tapestries she is thinking of buying.
Mind you come.  Or shall we lunch with our little duchess?  She says
she never sees you now.  Perhaps you are tired of Gladys?  I thought
you would be.  Her clever tongue gets on one's nerves.  Well, in any
case, be here at eleven."

"Must I really come, Harry?"

"Certainly.  The park is quite lovely now.  I don't think there have
been such lilacs since the year I met you."

"Very well.  I shall be here at eleven," said Dorian.  "Good night,
Harry."  As he reached the door, he hesitated for a moment, as if he
had something more to say.  Then he sighed and went out.



CHAPTER 20

It was a lovely night, so warm that he threw his coat over his arm and
did not even put his silk scarf round his throat.  As he strolled home,
smoking his cigarette, two young men in evening dress passed him.  He
heard one of them whisper to the other, "That is Dorian Gray." He
remembered how pleased he used to be when he was pointed out, or stared
at, or talked about.  He was tired of hearing his own name now.  Half
the charm of the little village where he had been so often lately was
that no one knew who he was.  He had often told the girl whom he had
lured to love him that he was poor, and she had believed him.  He had
told her once that he was wicked, and she had laughed at him and
answered that wicked people were always very old and very ugly.  What a
laugh she had!--just like a thrush singing.  And how pretty she had
been in her cotton dresses and her large hats!  She knew nothing, but
she had everything that he had lost.

When he reached home, he found his servant waiting up for him.  He sent
him to bed, and threw himself down on the sofa in the library, and
began to think over some of the things that Lord Henry had said to him.

Was it really true that one could never change?  He felt a wild longing
for the unstained purity of his boyhood--his rose-white boyhood, as
Lord Henry had once called it.  He knew that he had tarnished himself,
filled his mind with corruption and given horror to his fancy; that he
had been an evil influence to others, and had experienced a terrible
joy in being so; and that of the lives that had crossed his own, it had
been the fairest and the most full of promise that he had brought to
shame.  But was it all irretrievable?  Was there no hope for him?

Ah! in what a monstrous moment of pride and passion he had prayed that
the portrait should bear the burden of his days, and he keep the
unsullied splendour of eternal youth!  All his failure had been due to
that.  Better for him that each sin of his life had brought its sure
swift penalty along with it.  There was purification in punishment.
Not "Forgive us our sins" but "Smite us for our iniquities" should be
the prayer of man to a most just God.

The curiously carved mirror that Lord Henry had given to him, so many
years ago now, was standing on the table, and the white-limbed Cupids
laughed round it as of old.  He took it up, as he had done on that
night of horror when he had first noted the change in the fatal
picture, and with wild, tear-dimmed eyes looked into its polished
shield.  Once, some one who had terribly loved him had written to him a
mad letter, ending with these idolatrous words: "The world is changed
because you are made of ivory and gold.  The curves of your lips
rewrite history."  The phrases came back to his memory, and he repeated
them over and over to himself.  Then he loathed his own beauty, and
flinging the mirror on the floor, crushed it into silver splinters
beneath his heel.  It was his beauty that had ruined him, his beauty
and the youth that he had prayed for.  But for those two things, his
life might have been free from stain.  His beauty had been to him but a
mask, his youth but a mockery.  What was youth at best?  A green, an
unripe time, a time of shallow moods, and sickly thoughts.  Why had he
worn its livery?  Youth had spoiled him.

It was better not to think of the past.  Nothing could alter that.  It
was of himself, and of his own future, that he had to think.  James
Vane was hidden in a nameless grave in Selby churchyard.  Alan Campbell
had shot himself one night in his laboratory, but had not revealed the
secret that he had been forced to know.  The excitement, such as it
was, over Basil Hallward's disappearance would soon pass away.  It was
already waning.  He was perfectly safe there.  Nor, indeed, was it the
death of Basil Hallward that weighed most upon his mind.  It was the
living death of his own soul that troubled him.  Basil had painted the
portrait that had marred his life.  He could not forgive him that.  It
was the portrait that had done everything.  Basil had said things to
him that were unbearable, and that he had yet borne with patience.  The
murder had been simply the madness of a moment.  As for Alan Campbell,
his suicide had been his own act.  He had chosen to do it.  It was
nothing to him.

A new life!  That was what he wanted.  That was what he was waiting
for.  Surely he had begun it already.  He had spared one innocent
thing, at any rate.  He would never again tempt innocence.  He would be
good.

As he thought of Hetty Merton, he began to wonder if the portrait in
the locked room had changed.  Surely it was not still so horrible as it
had been?  Perhaps if his life became pure, he would be able to expel
every sign of evil passion from the face.  Perhaps the signs of evil
had already gone away.  He would go and look.

He took the lamp from the table and crept upstairs.  As he unbarred the
door, a smile of joy flitted across his strangely young-looking face
and lingered for a moment about his lips.  Yes, he would be good, and
the hideous thing that he had hidden away would no longer be a terror
to him.  He felt as if the load had been lifted from him already.

He went in quietly, locking the door behind him, as was his custom, and
dragged the purple hanging from the portrait.  A cry of pain and
indignation broke from him.  He could see no change, save that in the
eyes there was a look of cunning and in the mouth the curved wrinkle of
the hypocrite.  The thing was still loathsome--more loathsome, if
possible, than before--and the scarlet dew that spotted the hand seemed
brighter, and more like blood newly spilled.  Then he trembled.  Had it
been merely vanity that had made him do his one good deed?  Or the
desire for a new sensation, as Lord Henry had hinted, with his mocking
laugh?  Or that passion to act a part that sometimes makes us do things
finer than we are ourselves?  Or, perhaps, all these?  And why was the
red stain larger than it had been?  It seemed to have crept like a
horrible disease over the wrinkled fingers.  There was blood on the
painted feet, as though the thing had dripped--blood even on the hand
that had not held the knife.  Confess?  Did it mean that he was to
confess?  To give himself up and be put to death?  He laughed.  He felt
that the idea was monstrous.  Besides, even if he did confess, who
would believe him?  There was no trace of the murdered man anywhere.
Everything belonging to him had been destroyed.  He himself had burned
what had been below-stairs. The world would simply say that he was mad.
They would shut him up if he persisted in his story.... Yet it was
his duty to confess, to suffer public shame, and to make public
atonement.  There was a God who called upon men to tell their sins to
earth as well as to heaven.  Nothing that he could do would cleanse him
till he had told his own sin.  His sin?  He shrugged his shoulders.
The death of Basil Hallward seemed very little to him.  He was thinking
of Hetty Merton.  For it was an unjust mirror, this mirror of his soul
that he was looking at.  Vanity?  Curiosity?  Hypocrisy?  Had there
been nothing more in his renunciation than that?  There had been
something more.  At least he thought so.  But who could tell? ... No.
There had been nothing more.  Through vanity he had spared her.  In
hypocrisy he had worn the mask of goodness.  For curiosity's sake he
had tried the denial of self.  He recognized that now.

But this murder--was it to dog him all his life?  Was he always to be
burdened by his past?  Was he really to confess?  Never.  There was
only one bit of evidence left against him.  The picture itself--that
was evidence.  He would destroy it.  Why had he kept it so long?  Once
it had given him pleasure to watch it changing and growing old.  Of
late he had felt no such pleasure.  It had kept him awake at night.
When he had been away, he had been filled with terror lest other eyes
should look upon it.  It had brought melancholy across his passions.
Its mere memory had marred many moments of joy.  It had been like
conscience to him.  Yes, it had been conscience.  He would destroy it.

He looked round and saw the knife that had stabbed Basil Hallward.  He
had cleaned it many times, till there was no stain left upon it.  It
was bright, and glistened.  As it had killed the painter, so it would
kill the painter's work, and all that that meant.  It would kill the
past, and when that was dead, he would be free.  It would kill this
monstrous soul-life, and without its hideous warnings, he would be at
peace.  He seized the thing, and stabbed the picture with it.

There was a cry heard, and a crash.  The cry was so horrible in its
agony that the frightened servants woke and crept out of their rooms.
Two gentlemen, who were passing in the square below, stopped and looked
up at the great house.  They walked on till they met a policeman and
brought him back.  The man rang the bell several times, but there was
no answer.  Except for a light in one of the top windows, the house was
all dark.  After a time, he went away and stood in an adjoining portico
and watched.

"Whose house is that, Constable?" asked the elder of the two gentlemen.

"Mr. Dorian Gray's, sir," answered the policeman.

They looked at each other, as they walked away, and sneered.  One of
them was Sir Henry Ashton's uncle.

Inside, in the servants' part of the house, the half-clad domestics
were talking in low whispers to each other.  Old Mrs. Leaf was crying
and wringing her hands.  Francis was as pale as death.

After about a quarter of an hour, he got the coachman and one of the
footmen and crept upstairs.  They knocked, but there was no reply.
They called out.  Everything was still.  Finally, after vainly trying
to force the door, they got on the roof and dropped down on to the
balcony.  The windows yielded easily--their bolts were old.

When they entered, they found hanging upon the wall a splendid portrait
of their master as they had last seen him, in all the wonder of his
exquisite youth and beauty.  Lying on the floor was a dead man, in
evening dress, with a knife in his heart.  He was withered, wrinkled,
and loathsome of visage.  It was not till they had examined the rings
that they recognized who it was.









End of Project Gutenberg's The Picture of Dorian Gray, by Oscar Wilde

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PICTURE OF DORIAN GRAY ***

***** This file should be named 174.txt or 174.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/174/

Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Peter Pan, by James M. Barrie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Title: Peter Pan
       Peter Pan and Wendy

Author: James M. Barrie

Posting Date: June 25, 2008 [EBook #16]
Release Date: July, 1991
Last Updated: March 10, 2018

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PETER PAN ***










PETER PAN

[PETER AND WENDY]

By J. M. Barrie [James Matthew Barrie]

A Millennium Fulcrum Edition (c)1991 by Duncan Research




Contents:

Chapter 1 PETER BREAKS THROUGH

Chapter 2 THE SHADOW

Chapter 3 COME AWAY, COME AWAY!

Chapter 4 THE FLIGHT

Chapter 5 THE ISLAND COME TRUE

Chapter 6 THE LITTLE HOUSE

Chapter 7 THE HOME UNDER THE GROUND

Chapter 8 THE MERMAID'S LAGOON

Chapter 9 THE NEVER BIRD

Chapter 10 THE HAPPY HOME

Chapter 11 WENDY'S STORY

Chapter 12 THE CHILDREN ARE CARRIED OFF

Chapter 13 DO YOU BELIEVE IN FAIRIES?

Chapter 14 THE PIRATE SHIP

Chapter 15 “HOOK OR ME THIS TIME”

Chapter 16 THE RETURN HOME

Chapter 17 WHEN WENDY GREW UP




Chapter 1 PETER BREAKS THROUGH

All children, except one, grow up. They soon know that they will grow
up, and the way Wendy knew was this. One day when she was two years old
she was playing in a garden, and she plucked another flower and ran with
it to her mother. I suppose she must have looked rather delightful, for
Mrs. Darling put her hand to her heart and cried, “Oh, why can't you
remain like this for ever!” This was all that passed between them on
the subject, but henceforth Wendy knew that she must grow up. You always
know after you are two. Two is the beginning of the end.

Of course they lived at 14 [their house number on their street], and
until Wendy came her mother was the chief one. She was a lovely lady,
with a romantic mind and such a sweet mocking mouth. Her romantic
mind was like the tiny boxes, one within the other, that come from the
puzzling East, however many you discover there is always one more; and
her sweet mocking mouth had one kiss on it that Wendy could never get,
though there it was, perfectly conspicuous in the right-hand corner.

The way Mr. Darling won her was this: the many gentlemen who had been
boys when she was a girl discovered simultaneously that they loved her,
and they all ran to her house to propose to her except Mr. Darling, who
took a cab and nipped in first, and so he got her. He got all of her,
except the innermost box and the kiss. He never knew about the box, and
in time he gave up trying for the kiss. Wendy thought Napoleon could
have got it, but I can picture him trying, and then going off in a
passion, slamming the door.

Mr. Darling used to boast to Wendy that her mother not only loved him
but respected him. He was one of those deep ones who know about stocks
and shares. Of course no one really knows, but he quite seemed to know,
and he often said stocks were up and shares were down in a way that
would have made any woman respect him.

Mrs. Darling was married in white, and at first she kept the books
perfectly, almost gleefully, as if it were a game, not so much as a
Brussels sprout was missing; but by and by whole cauliflowers dropped
out, and instead of them there were pictures of babies without faces.
She drew them when she should have been totting up. They were Mrs.
Darling's guesses.

Wendy came first, then John, then Michael.

For a week or two after Wendy came it was doubtful whether they would
be able to keep her, as she was another mouth to feed. Mr. Darling was
frightfully proud of her, but he was very honourable, and he sat on the
edge of Mrs. Darling's bed, holding her hand and calculating expenses,
while she looked at him imploringly. She wanted to risk it, come what
might, but that was not his way; his way was with a pencil and a piece
of paper, and if she confused him with suggestions he had to begin at
the beginning again.

“Now don't interrupt,” he would beg of her.

“I have one pound seventeen here, and two and six at the office; I can
cut off my coffee at the office, say ten shillings, making two nine
and six, with your eighteen and three makes three nine seven, with five
naught naught in my cheque-book makes eight nine seven--who is that
moving?--eight nine seven, dot and carry seven--don't speak, my own--and
the pound you lent to that man who came to the door--quiet, child--dot
and carry child--there, you've done it!--did I say nine nine seven? yes,
I said nine nine seven; the question is, can we try it for a year on
nine nine seven?”

“Of course we can, George,” she cried. But she was prejudiced in Wendy's
favour, and he was really the grander character of the two.

“Remember mumps,” he warned her almost threateningly, and off he went
again. “Mumps one pound, that is what I have put down, but I daresay
it will be more like thirty shillings--don't speak--measles one five,
German measles half a guinea, makes two fifteen six--don't waggle your
finger--whooping-cough, say fifteen shillings”--and so on it went, and
it added up differently each time; but at last Wendy just got through,
with mumps reduced to twelve six, and the two kinds of measles treated
as one.

There was the same excitement over John, and Michael had even a narrower
squeak; but both were kept, and soon, you might have seen the three of
them going in a row to Miss Fulsom's Kindergarten school, accompanied by
their nurse.

Mrs. Darling loved to have everything just so, and Mr. Darling had a
passion for being exactly like his neighbours; so, of course, they had
a nurse. As they were poor, owing to the amount of milk the children
drank, this nurse was a prim Newfoundland dog, called Nana, who had
belonged to no one in particular until the Darlings engaged her. She had
always thought children important, however, and the Darlings had become
acquainted with her in Kensington Gardens, where she spent most of her
spare time peeping into perambulators, and was much hated by careless
nursemaids, whom she followed to their homes and complained of to their
mistresses. She proved to be quite a treasure of a nurse. How thorough
she was at bath-time, and up at any moment of the night if one of her
charges made the slightest cry. Of course her kennel was in the nursery.
She had a genius for knowing when a cough is a thing to have no patience
with and when it needs stocking around your throat. She believed to her
last day in old-fashioned remedies like rhubarb leaf, and made sounds of
contempt over all this new-fangled talk about germs, and so on. It was a
lesson in propriety to see her escorting the children to school, walking
sedately by their side when they were well behaved, and butting them
back into line if they strayed. On John's footer [in England soccer
was called football, “footer” for short] days she never once forgot his
sweater, and she usually carried an umbrella in her mouth in case of
rain. There is a room in the basement of Miss Fulsom's school where the
nurses wait. They sat on forms, while Nana lay on the floor, but that
was the only difference. They affected to ignore her as of an inferior
social status to themselves, and she despised their light talk. She
resented visits to the nursery from Mrs. Darling's friends, but if they
did come she first whipped off Michael's pinafore and put him into the
one with blue braiding, and smoothed out Wendy and made a dash at John's
hair.

No nursery could possibly have been conducted more correctly, and
Mr. Darling knew it, yet he sometimes wondered uneasily whether the
neighbours talked.

He had his position in the city to consider.

Nana also troubled him in another way. He had sometimes a feeling that
she did not admire him. “I know she admires you tremendously, George,”
 Mrs. Darling would assure him, and then she would sign to the children
to be specially nice to father. Lovely dances followed, in which the
only other servant, Liza, was sometimes allowed to join. Such a midget
she looked in her long skirt and maid's cap, though she had sworn, when
engaged, that she would never see ten again. The gaiety of those romps!
And gayest of all was Mrs. Darling, who would pirouette so wildly that
all you could see of her was the kiss, and then if you had dashed at her
you might have got it. There never was a simpler happier family until
the coming of Peter Pan.

Mrs. Darling first heard of Peter when she was tidying up her children's
minds. It is the nightly custom of every good mother after her children
are asleep to rummage in their minds and put things straight for next
morning, repacking into their proper places the many articles that have
wandered during the day. If you could keep awake (but of course you
can't) you would see your own mother doing this, and you would find it
very interesting to watch her. It is quite like tidying up drawers. You
would see her on her knees, I expect, lingering humorously over some of
your contents, wondering where on earth you had picked this thing up,
making discoveries sweet and not so sweet, pressing this to her cheek as
if it were as nice as a kitten, and hurriedly stowing that out of sight.
When you wake in the morning, the naughtiness and evil passions with
which you went to bed have been folded up small and placed at the bottom
of your mind and on the top, beautifully aired, are spread out your
prettier thoughts, ready for you to put on.

I don't know whether you have ever seen a map of a person's mind.
Doctors sometimes draw maps of other parts of you, and your own map can
become intensely interesting, but catch them trying to draw a map of a
child's mind, which is not only confused, but keeps going round all
the time. There are zigzag lines on it, just like your temperature on a
card, and these are probably roads in the island, for the Neverland is
always more or less an island, with astonishing splashes of colour here
and there, and coral reefs and rakish-looking craft in the offing, and
savages and lonely lairs, and gnomes who are mostly tailors, and caves
through which a river runs, and princes with six elder brothers, and a
hut fast going to decay, and one very small old lady with a hooked nose.
It would be an easy map if that were all, but there is also first day
at school, religion, fathers, the round pond, needle-work, murders,
hangings, verbs that take the dative, chocolate pudding day, getting
into braces, say ninety-nine, three-pence for pulling out your tooth
yourself, and so on, and either these are part of the island or they are
another map showing through, and it is all rather confusing, especially
as nothing will stand still.

Of course the Neverlands vary a good deal. John's, for instance, had a
lagoon with flamingoes flying over it at which John was shooting, while
Michael, who was very small, had a flamingo with lagoons flying over
it. John lived in a boat turned upside down on the sands, Michael in
a wigwam, Wendy in a house of leaves deftly sewn together. John had no
friends, Michael had friends at night, Wendy had a pet wolf forsaken by
its parents, but on the whole the Neverlands have a family resemblance,
and if they stood still in a row you could say of them that they have
each other's nose, and so forth. On these magic shores children at play
are for ever beaching their coracles [simple boat]. We too have been
there; we can still hear the sound of the surf, though we shall land no
more.

Of all delectable islands the Neverland is the snuggest and most
compact, not large and sprawly, you know, with tedious distances between
one adventure and another, but nicely crammed. When you play at it by
day with the chairs and table-cloth, it is not in the least alarming,
but in the two minutes before you go to sleep it becomes very real. That
is why there are night-lights.

Occasionally in her travels through her children's minds Mrs. Darling
found things she could not understand, and of these quite the most
perplexing was the word Peter. She knew of no Peter, and yet he was
here and there in John and Michael's minds, while Wendy's began to be
scrawled all over with him. The name stood out in bolder letters than
any of the other words, and as Mrs. Darling gazed she felt that it had
an oddly cocky appearance.

“Yes, he is rather cocky,” Wendy admitted with regret. Her mother had
been questioning her.

“But who is he, my pet?”

“He is Peter Pan, you know, mother.”

At first Mrs. Darling did not know, but after thinking back into her
childhood she just remembered a Peter Pan who was said to live with the
fairies. There were odd stories about him, as that when children died he
went part of the way with them, so that they should not be frightened.
She had believed in him at the time, but now that she was married and
full of sense she quite doubted whether there was any such person.

“Besides,” she said to Wendy, “he would be grown up by this time.”

“Oh no, he isn't grown up,” Wendy assured her confidently, “and he is
just my size.” She meant that he was her size in both mind and body; she
didn't know how she knew, she just knew it.

Mrs. Darling consulted Mr. Darling, but he smiled pooh-pooh. “Mark my
words,” he said, “it is some nonsense Nana has been putting into their
heads; just the sort of idea a dog would have. Leave it alone, and it
will blow over.”

But it would not blow over and soon the troublesome boy gave Mrs.
Darling quite a shock.

Children have the strangest adventures without being troubled by them.
For instance, they may remember to mention, a week after the event
happened, that when they were in the wood they had met their dead
father and had a game with him. It was in this casual way that Wendy one
morning made a disquieting revelation. Some leaves of a tree had been
found on the nursery floor, which certainly were not there when the
children went to bed, and Mrs. Darling was puzzling over them when Wendy
said with a tolerant smile:

“I do believe it is that Peter again!”

“Whatever do you mean, Wendy?”

“It is so naughty of him not to wipe his feet,” Wendy said, sighing. She
was a tidy child.

She explained in quite a matter-of-fact way that she thought Peter
sometimes came to the nursery in the night and sat on the foot of her
bed and played on his pipes to her. Unfortunately she never woke, so she
didn't know how she knew, she just knew.

“What nonsense you talk, precious. No one can get into the house without
knocking.”

“I think he comes in by the window,” she said.

“My love, it is three floors up.”

“Were not the leaves at the foot of the window, mother?”

It was quite true; the leaves had been found very near the window.

Mrs. Darling did not know what to think, for it all seemed so natural to
Wendy that you could not dismiss it by saying she had been dreaming.

“My child,” the mother cried, “why did you not tell me of this before?”

“I forgot,” said Wendy lightly. She was in a hurry to get her breakfast.

Oh, surely she must have been dreaming.

But, on the other hand, there were the leaves. Mrs. Darling examined
them very carefully; they were skeleton leaves, but she was sure they
did not come from any tree that grew in England. She crawled about the
floor, peering at it with a candle for marks of a strange foot. She
rattled the poker up the chimney and tapped the walls. She let down a
tape from the window to the pavement, and it was a sheer drop of thirty
feet, without so much as a spout to climb up by.

Certainly Wendy had been dreaming.

But Wendy had not been dreaming, as the very next night showed, the
night on which the extraordinary adventures of these children may be
said to have begun.

On the night we speak of all the children were once more in bed. It
happened to be Nana's evening off, and Mrs. Darling had bathed them and
sung to them till one by one they had let go her hand and slid away into
the land of sleep.

All were looking so safe and cosy that she smiled at her fears now and
sat down tranquilly by the fire to sew.

It was something for Michael, who on his birthday was getting into
shirts. The fire was warm, however, and the nursery dimly lit by three
night-lights, and presently the sewing lay on Mrs. Darling's lap. Then
her head nodded, oh, so gracefully. She was asleep. Look at the four of
them, Wendy and Michael over there, John here, and Mrs. Darling by the
fire. There should have been a fourth night-light.

While she slept she had a dream. She dreamt that the Neverland had come
too near and that a strange boy had broken through from it. He did not
alarm her, for she thought she had seen him before in the faces of many
women who have no children. Perhaps he is to be found in the faces of
some mothers also. But in her dream he had rent the film that obscures
the Neverland, and she saw Wendy and John and Michael peeping through
the gap.

The dream by itself would have been a trifle, but while she was dreaming
the window of the nursery blew open, and a boy did drop on the floor.
He was accompanied by a strange light, no bigger than your fist, which
darted about the room like a living thing and I think it must have been
this light that wakened Mrs. Darling.

She started up with a cry, and saw the boy, and somehow she knew at once
that he was Peter Pan. If you or I or Wendy had been there we should
have seen that he was very like Mrs. Darling's kiss. He was a lovely
boy, clad in skeleton leaves and the juices that ooze out of trees but
the most entrancing thing about him was that he had all his first teeth.
When he saw she was a grown-up, he gnashed the little pearls at her.




Chapter 2 THE SHADOW

Mrs. Darling screamed, and, as if in answer to a bell, the door opened,
and Nana entered, returned from her evening out. She growled and sprang
at the boy, who leapt lightly through the window. Again Mrs. Darling
screamed, this time in distress for him, for she thought he was killed,
and she ran down into the street to look for his little body, but it
was not there; and she looked up, and in the black night she could see
nothing but what she thought was a shooting star.

She returned to the nursery, and found Nana with something in her mouth,
which proved to be the boy's shadow. As he leapt at the window Nana had
closed it quickly, too late to catch him, but his shadow had not had
time to get out; slam went the window and snapped it off.

You may be sure Mrs. Darling examined the shadow carefully, but it was
quite the ordinary kind.

Nana had no doubt of what was the best thing to do with this shadow. She
hung it out at the window, meaning “He is sure to come back for it; let
us put it where he can get it easily without disturbing the children.”

But unfortunately Mrs. Darling could not leave it hanging out at the
window, it looked so like the washing and lowered the whole tone of the
house. She thought of showing it to Mr. Darling, but he was totting up
winter great-coats for John and Michael, with a wet towel around his
head to keep his brain clear, and it seemed a shame to trouble him;
besides, she knew exactly what he would say: “It all comes of having a
dog for a nurse.”

She decided to roll the shadow up and put it away carefully in a drawer,
until a fitting opportunity came for telling her husband. Ah me!

The opportunity came a week later, on that never-to-be-forgotten Friday.
Of course it was a Friday.

“I ought to have been specially careful on a Friday,” she used to say
afterwards to her husband, while perhaps Nana was on the other side of
her, holding her hand.

“No, no,” Mr. Darling always said, “I am responsible for it all. I,
George Darling, did it. MEA CULPA, MEA CULPA.” He had had a classical
education.

They sat thus night after night recalling that fatal Friday, till every
detail of it was stamped on their brains and came through on the other
side like the faces on a bad coinage.

“If only I had not accepted that invitation to dine at 27,” Mrs. Darling
said.

“If only I had not poured my medicine into Nana's bowl,” said Mr.
Darling.

“If only I had pretended to like the medicine,” was what Nana's wet eyes
said.

“My liking for parties, George.”

“My fatal gift of humour, dearest.”

“My touchiness about trifles, dear master and mistress.”

Then one or more of them would break down altogether; Nana at the
thought, “It's true, it's true, they ought not to have had a dog for
a nurse.” Many a time it was Mr. Darling who put the handkerchief to
Nana's eyes.

“That fiend!” Mr. Darling would cry, and Nana's bark was the echo of
it, but Mrs. Darling never upbraided Peter; there was something in the
right-hand corner of her mouth that wanted her not to call Peter names.

They would sit there in the empty nursery, recalling fondly every
smallest detail of that dreadful evening. It had begun so uneventfully,
so precisely like a hundred other evenings, with Nana putting on the
water for Michael's bath and carrying him to it on her back.

“I won't go to bed,” he had shouted, like one who still believed that he
had the last word on the subject, “I won't, I won't. Nana, it isn't six
o'clock yet. Oh dear, oh dear, I shan't love you any more, Nana. I tell
you I won't be bathed, I won't, I won't!”

Then Mrs. Darling had come in, wearing her white evening-gown. She had
dressed early because Wendy so loved to see her in her evening-gown,
with the necklace George had given her. She was wearing Wendy's bracelet
on her arm; she had asked for the loan of it. Wendy loved to lend her
bracelet to her mother.

She had found her two older children playing at being herself and father
on the occasion of Wendy's birth, and John was saying:

“I am happy to inform you, Mrs. Darling, that you are now a mother,”
 in just such a tone as Mr. Darling himself may have used on the real
occasion.

Wendy had danced with joy, just as the real Mrs. Darling must have done.

Then John was born, with the extra pomp that he conceived due to the
birth of a male, and Michael came from his bath to ask to be born also,
but John said brutally that they did not want any more.

Michael had nearly cried. “Nobody wants me,” he said, and of course the
lady in the evening-dress could not stand that.

“I do,” she said, “I so want a third child.”

“Boy or girl?” asked Michael, not too hopefully.

“Boy.”

Then he had leapt into her arms. Such a little thing for Mr. and Mrs.
Darling and Nana to recall now, but not so little if that was to be
Michael's last night in the nursery.

They go on with their recollections.

“It was then that I rushed in like a tornado, wasn't it?” Mr. Darling
would say, scorning himself; and indeed he had been like a tornado.

Perhaps there was some excuse for him. He, too, had been dressing for
the party, and all had gone well with him until he came to his tie. It
is an astounding thing to have to tell, but this man, though he knew
about stocks and shares, had no real mastery of his tie. Sometimes the
thing yielded to him without a contest, but there were occasions when it
would have been better for the house if he had swallowed his pride and
used a made-up tie.

This was such an occasion. He came rushing into the nursery with the
crumpled little brute of a tie in his hand.

“Why, what is the matter, father dear?”

“Matter!” he yelled; he really yelled. “This tie, it will not tie.” He
became dangerously sarcastic. “Not round my neck! Round the bed-post!
Oh yes, twenty times have I made it up round the bed-post, but round my
neck, no! Oh dear no! begs to be excused!”

He thought Mrs. Darling was not sufficiently impressed, and he went on
sternly, “I warn you of this, mother, that unless this tie is round my
neck we don't go out to dinner to-night, and if I don't go out to dinner
to-night, I never go to the office again, and if I don't go to the
office again, you and I starve, and our children will be flung into the
streets.”

Even then Mrs. Darling was placid. “Let me try, dear,” she said, and
indeed that was what he had come to ask her to do, and with her nice
cool hands she tied his tie for him, while the children stood around to
see their fate decided. Some men would have resented her being able to
do it so easily, but Mr. Darling had far too fine a nature for that; he
thanked her carelessly, at once forgot his rage, and in another moment
was dancing round the room with Michael on his back.

“How wildly we romped!” says Mrs. Darling now, recalling it.

“Our last romp!” Mr. Darling groaned.

“O George, do you remember Michael suddenly said to me, 'How did you get
to know me, mother?'”

“I remember!”

“They were rather sweet, don't you think, George?”

“And they were ours, ours! and now they are gone.”

The romp had ended with the appearance of Nana, and most unluckily Mr.
Darling collided against her, covering his trousers with hairs. They
were not only new trousers, but they were the first he had ever had
with braid on them, and he had had to bite his lip to prevent the tears
coming. Of course Mrs. Darling brushed him, but he began to talk again
about its being a mistake to have a dog for a nurse.

“George, Nana is a treasure.”

“No doubt, but I have an uneasy feeling at times that she looks upon the
children as puppies.”

“Oh no, dear one, I feel sure she knows they have souls.”

“I wonder,” Mr. Darling said thoughtfully, “I wonder.” It was an
opportunity, his wife felt, for telling him about the boy. At first he
pooh-poohed the story, but he became thoughtful when she showed him the
shadow.

“It is nobody I know,” he said, examining it carefully, “but it does
look a scoundrel.”

“We were still discussing it, you remember,” says Mr. Darling, “when
Nana came in with Michael's medicine. You will never carry the bottle in
your mouth again, Nana, and it is all my fault.”

Strong man though he was, there is no doubt that he had behaved rather
foolishly over the medicine. If he had a weakness, it was for thinking
that all his life he had taken medicine boldly, and so now, when Michael
dodged the spoon in Nana's mouth, he had said reprovingly, “Be a man,
Michael.”

“Won't; won't!” Michael cried naughtily. Mrs. Darling left the room to
get a chocolate for him, and Mr. Darling thought this showed want of
firmness.

“Mother, don't pamper him,” he called after her. “Michael, when I was
your age I took medicine without a murmur. I said, 'Thank you, kind
parents, for giving me bottles to make me well.'”

He really thought this was true, and Wendy, who was now in her
night-gown, believed it also, and she said, to encourage Michael, “That
medicine you sometimes take, father, is much nastier, isn't it?”

“Ever so much nastier,” Mr. Darling said bravely, “and I would take it
now as an example to you, Michael, if I hadn't lost the bottle.”

He had not exactly lost it; he had climbed in the dead of night to the
top of the wardrobe and hidden it there. What he did not know was that
the faithful Liza had found it, and put it back on his wash-stand.

“I know where it is, father,” Wendy cried, always glad to be of service.
“I'll bring it,” and she was off before he could stop her. Immediately
his spirits sank in the strangest way.

“John,” he said, shuddering, “it's most beastly stuff. It's that nasty,
sticky, sweet kind.”

“It will soon be over, father,” John said cheerily, and then in rushed
Wendy with the medicine in a glass.

“I have been as quick as I could,” she panted.

“You have been wonderfully quick,” her father retorted, with a
vindictive politeness that was quite thrown away upon her. “Michael
first,” he said doggedly.

“Father first,” said Michael, who was of a suspicious nature.

“I shall be sick, you know,” Mr. Darling said threateningly.

“Come on, father,” said John.

“Hold your tongue, John,” his father rapped out.

Wendy was quite puzzled. “I thought you took it quite easily, father.”

“That is not the point,” he retorted. “The point is, that there is
more in my glass than in Michael's spoon.” His proud heart was nearly
bursting. “And it isn't fair: I would say it though it were with my last
breath; it isn't fair.”

“Father, I am waiting,” said Michael coldly.

“It's all very well to say you are waiting; so am I waiting.”

“Father's a cowardly custard.”

“So are you a cowardly custard.”

“I'm not frightened.”

“Neither am I frightened.”

“Well, then, take it.”

“Well, then, you take it.”

Wendy had a splendid idea. “Why not both take it at the same time?”

“Certainly,” said Mr. Darling. “Are you ready, Michael?”

Wendy gave the words, one, two, three, and Michael took his medicine,
but Mr. Darling slipped his behind his back.

There was a yell of rage from Michael, and “O father!” Wendy exclaimed.

“What do you mean by 'O father'?” Mr. Darling demanded. “Stop that row,
Michael. I meant to take mine, but I--I missed it.”

It was dreadful the way all the three were looking at him, just as if
they did not admire him. “Look here, all of you,” he said entreatingly,
as soon as Nana had gone into the bathroom. “I have just thought of a
splendid joke. I shall pour my medicine into Nana's bowl, and she will
drink it, thinking it is milk!”

It was the colour of milk; but the children did not have their father's
sense of humour, and they looked at him reproachfully as he poured the
medicine into Nana's bowl. “What fun!” he said doubtfully, and they did
not dare expose him when Mrs. Darling and Nana returned.

“Nana, good dog,” he said, patting her, “I have put a little milk into
your bowl, Nana.”

Nana wagged her tail, ran to the medicine, and began lapping it. Then
she gave Mr. Darling such a look, not an angry look: she showed him the
great red tear that makes us so sorry for noble dogs, and crept into her
kennel.

Mr. Darling was frightfully ashamed of himself, but he would not give
in. In a horrid silence Mrs. Darling smelt the bowl. “O George,” she
said, “it's your medicine!”

“It was only a joke,” he roared, while she comforted her boys, and Wendy
hugged Nana. “Much good,” he said bitterly, “my wearing myself to the
bone trying to be funny in this house.”

And still Wendy hugged Nana. “That's right,” he shouted. “Coddle her!
Nobody coddles me. Oh dear no! I am only the breadwinner, why should I
be coddled--why, why, why!”

“George,” Mrs. Darling entreated him, “not so loud; the servants
will hear you.” Somehow they had got into the way of calling Liza the
servants.

“Let them!” he answered recklessly. “Bring in the whole world. But I
refuse to allow that dog to lord it in my nursery for an hour longer.”

The children wept, and Nana ran to him beseechingly, but he waved her
back. He felt he was a strong man again. “In vain, in vain,” he cried;
“the proper place for you is the yard, and there you go to be tied up
this instant.”

“George, George,” Mrs. Darling whispered, “remember what I told you
about that boy.”

Alas, he would not listen. He was determined to show who was master in
that house, and when commands would not draw Nana from the kennel, he
lured her out of it with honeyed words, and seizing her roughly, dragged
her from the nursery. He was ashamed of himself, and yet he did it.
It was all owing to his too affectionate nature, which craved for
admiration. When he had tied her up in the back-yard, the wretched
father went and sat in the passage, with his knuckles to his eyes.

In the meantime Mrs. Darling had put the children to bed in unwonted
silence and lit their night-lights. They could hear Nana barking, and
John whimpered, “It is because he is chaining her up in the yard,” but
Wendy was wiser.

“That is not Nana's unhappy bark,” she said, little guessing what was
about to happen; “that is her bark when she smells danger.”

Danger!

“Are you sure, Wendy?”

“Oh, yes.”

Mrs. Darling quivered and went to the window. It was securely fastened.
She looked out, and the night was peppered with stars. They were
crowding round the house, as if curious to see what was to take place
there, but she did not notice this, nor that one or two of the smaller
ones winked at her. Yet a nameless fear clutched at her heart and made
her cry, “Oh, how I wish that I wasn't going to a party to-night!”

Even Michael, already half asleep, knew that she was perturbed, and he
asked, “Can anything harm us, mother, after the night-lights are lit?”

“Nothing, precious,” she said; “they are the eyes a mother leaves behind
her to guard her children.”

She went from bed to bed singing enchantments over them, and little
Michael flung his arms round her. “Mother,” he cried, “I'm glad of you.”
 They were the last words she was to hear from him for a long time.

No. 27 was only a few yards distant, but there had been a slight fall of
snow, and Father and Mother Darling picked their way over it deftly not
to soil their shoes. They were already the only persons in the street,
and all the stars were watching them. Stars are beautiful, but they may
not take an active part in anything, they must just look on for ever. It
is a punishment put on them for something they did so long ago that no
star now knows what it was. So the older ones have become glassy-eyed
and seldom speak (winking is the star language), but the little
ones still wonder. They are not really friendly to Peter, who had a
mischievous way of stealing up behind them and trying to blow them out;
but they are so fond of fun that they were on his side to-night, and
anxious to get the grown-ups out of the way. So as soon as the door
of 27 closed on Mr. and Mrs. Darling there was a commotion in the
firmament, and the smallest of all the stars in the Milky Way screamed
out:

“Now, Peter!”




Chapter 3 COME AWAY, COME AWAY!

For a moment after Mr. and Mrs. Darling left the house the night-lights
by the beds of the three children continued to burn clearly. They were
awfully nice little night-lights, and one cannot help wishing that they
could have kept awake to see Peter; but Wendy's light blinked and gave
such a yawn that the other two yawned also, and before they could close
their mouths all the three went out.

There was another light in the room now, a thousand times brighter than
the night-lights, and in the time we have taken to say this, it had been
in all the drawers in the nursery, looking for Peter's shadow, rummaged
the wardrobe and turned every pocket inside out. It was not really a
light; it made this light by flashing about so quickly, but when it came
to rest for a second you saw it was a fairy, no longer than your hand,
but still growing. It was a girl called Tinker Bell exquisitely gowned
in a skeleton leaf, cut low and square, through which her figure could
be seen to the best advantage. She was slightly inclined to EMBONPOINT.
[plump hourglass figure]

A moment after the fairy's entrance the window was blown open by the
breathing of the little stars, and Peter dropped in. He had carried
Tinker Bell part of the way, and his hand was still messy with the fairy
dust.

“Tinker Bell,” he called softly, after making sure that the children
were asleep, “Tink, where are you?” She was in a jug for the moment, and
liking it extremely; she had never been in a jug before.

“Oh, do come out of that jug, and tell me, do you know where they put my
shadow?”

The loveliest tinkle as of golden bells answered him. It is the fairy
language. You ordinary children can never hear it, but if you were to
hear it you would know that you had heard it once before.

Tink said that the shadow was in the big box. She meant the chest of
drawers, and Peter jumped at the drawers, scattering their contents to
the floor with both hands, as kings toss ha'pence to the crowd. In a
moment he had recovered his shadow, and in his delight he forgot that he
had shut Tinker Bell up in the drawer.

If he thought at all, but I don't believe he ever thought, it was that
he and his shadow, when brought near each other, would join like drops
of water, and when they did not he was appalled. He tried to stick it
on with soap from the bathroom, but that also failed. A shudder passed
through Peter, and he sat on the floor and cried.

His sobs woke Wendy, and she sat up in bed. She was not alarmed to see
a stranger crying on the nursery floor; she was only pleasantly
interested.

“Boy,” she said courteously, “why are you crying?”

Peter could be exceeding polite also, having learned the grand manner at
fairy ceremonies, and he rose and bowed to her beautifully. She was much
pleased, and bowed beautifully to him from the bed.

“What's your name?” he asked.

“Wendy Moira Angela Darling,” she replied with some satisfaction. “What
is your name?”

“Peter Pan.”

She was already sure that he must be Peter, but it did seem a
comparatively short name.

“Is that all?”

“Yes,” he said rather sharply. He felt for the first time that it was a
shortish name.

“I'm so sorry,” said Wendy Moira Angela.

“It doesn't matter,” Peter gulped.

She asked where he lived.

“Second to the right,” said Peter, “and then straight on till morning.”

“What a funny address!”

Peter had a sinking. For the first time he felt that perhaps it was a
funny address.

“No, it isn't,” he said.

“I mean,” Wendy said nicely, remembering that she was hostess, “is that
what they put on the letters?”

He wished she had not mentioned letters.

“Don't get any letters,” he said contemptuously.

“But your mother gets letters?”

“Don't have a mother,” he said. Not only had he no mother, but he had
not the slightest desire to have one. He thought them very over-rated
persons. Wendy, however, felt at once that she was in the presence of a
tragedy.

“O Peter, no wonder you were crying,” she said, and got out of bed and
ran to him.

“I wasn't crying about mothers,” he said rather indignantly. “I was
crying because I can't get my shadow to stick on. Besides, I wasn't
crying.”

“It has come off?”

“Yes.”

Then Wendy saw the shadow on the floor, looking so draggled, and she was
frightfully sorry for Peter. “How awful!” she said, but she could not
help smiling when she saw that he had been trying to stick it on with
soap. How exactly like a boy!

Fortunately she knew at once what to do. “It must be sewn on,” she said,
just a little patronisingly.

“What's sewn?” he asked.

“You're dreadfully ignorant.”

“No, I'm not.”

But she was exulting in his ignorance. “I shall sew it on for you, my
little man,” she said, though he was tall as herself, and she got out
her housewife [sewing bag], and sewed the shadow on to Peter's foot.

“I daresay it will hurt a little,” she warned him.

“Oh, I shan't cry,” said Peter, who was already of the opinion that he
had never cried in his life. And he clenched his teeth and did not
cry, and soon his shadow was behaving properly, though still a little
creased.

“Perhaps I should have ironed it,” Wendy said thoughtfully, but Peter,
boylike, was indifferent to appearances, and he was now jumping about in
the wildest glee. Alas, he had already forgotten that he owed his bliss
to Wendy. He thought he had attached the shadow himself. “How clever I
am!” he crowed rapturously, “oh, the cleverness of me!”

It is humiliating to have to confess that this conceit of Peter was
one of his most fascinating qualities. To put it with brutal frankness,
there never was a cockier boy.

But for the moment Wendy was shocked. “You conceit [braggart],” she
exclaimed, with frightful sarcasm; “of course I did nothing!”

“You did a little,” Peter said carelessly, and continued to dance.

“A little!” she replied with hauteur [pride]; “if I am no use I can at
least withdraw,” and she sprang in the most dignified way into bed and
covered her face with the blankets.

To induce her to look up he pretended to be going away, and when this
failed he sat on the end of the bed and tapped her gently with his foot.
“Wendy,” he said, “don't withdraw. I can't help crowing, Wendy, when
I'm pleased with myself.” Still she would not look up, though she was
listening eagerly. “Wendy,” he continued, in a voice that no woman has
ever yet been able to resist, “Wendy, one girl is more use than twenty
boys.”

Now Wendy was every inch a woman, though there were not very many
inches, and she peeped out of the bed-clothes.

“Do you really think so, Peter?”

“Yes, I do.”

“I think it's perfectly sweet of you,” she declared, “and I'll get up
again,” and she sat with him on the side of the bed. She also said
she would give him a kiss if he liked, but Peter did not know what she
meant, and he held out his hand expectantly.

“Surely you know what a kiss is?” she asked, aghast.

“I shall know when you give it to me,” he replied stiffly, and not to
hurt his feeling she gave him a thimble.

“Now,” said he, “shall I give you a kiss?” and she replied with a slight
primness, “If you please.” She made herself rather cheap by inclining
her face toward him, but he merely dropped an acorn button into her
hand, so she slowly returned her face to where it had been before, and
said nicely that she would wear his kiss on the chain around her neck.
It was lucky that she did put it on that chain, for it was afterwards to
save her life.

When people in our set are introduced, it is customary for them to
ask each other's age, and so Wendy, who always liked to do the correct
thing, asked Peter how old he was. It was not really a happy question to
ask him; it was like an examination paper that asks grammar, when what
you want to be asked is Kings of England.

“I don't know,” he replied uneasily, “but I am quite young.” He really
knew nothing about it, he had merely suspicions, but he said at a
venture, “Wendy, I ran away the day I was born.”

Wendy was quite surprised, but interested; and she indicated in the
charming drawing-room manner, by a touch on her night-gown, that he
could sit nearer her.

“It was because I heard father and mother,” he explained in a low
voice, “talking about what I was to be when I became a man.” He was
extraordinarily agitated now. “I don't want ever to be a man,” he said
with passion. “I want always to be a little boy and to have fun. So
I ran away to Kensington Gardens and lived a long long time among the
fairies.”

She gave him a look of the most intense admiration, and he thought it
was because he had run away, but it was really because he knew fairies.
Wendy had lived such a home life that to know fairies struck her as
quite delightful. She poured out questions about them, to his surprise,
for they were rather a nuisance to him, getting in his way and so on,
and indeed he sometimes had to give them a hiding [spanking]. Still, he
liked them on the whole, and he told her about the beginning of fairies.

“You see, Wendy, when the first baby laughed for the first time, its
laugh broke into a thousand pieces, and they all went skipping about,
and that was the beginning of fairies.”

Tedious talk this, but being a stay-at-home she liked it.

“And so,” he went on good-naturedly, “there ought to be one fairy for
every boy and girl.”

“Ought to be? Isn't there?”

“No. You see children know such a lot now, they soon don't believe in
fairies, and every time a child says, 'I don't believe in fairies,'
there is a fairy somewhere that falls down dead.”

Really, he thought they had now talked enough about fairies, and it
struck him that Tinker Bell was keeping very quiet. “I can't think where
she has gone to,” he said, rising, and he called Tink by name. Wendy's
heart went flutter with a sudden thrill.

“Peter,” she cried, clutching him, “you don't mean to tell me that there
is a fairy in this room!”

“She was here just now,” he said a little impatiently. “You don't hear
her, do you?” and they both listened.

“The only sound I hear,” said Wendy, “is like a tinkle of bells.”

“Well, that's Tink, that's the fairy language. I think I hear her too.”

The sound came from the chest of drawers, and Peter made a merry face.
No one could ever look quite so merry as Peter, and the loveliest of
gurgles was his laugh. He had his first laugh still.

“Wendy,” he whispered gleefully, “I do believe I shut her up in the
drawer!”

He let poor Tink out of the drawer, and she flew about the nursery
screaming with fury. “You shouldn't say such things,” Peter retorted.
“Of course I'm very sorry, but how could I know you were in the drawer?”

Wendy was not listening to him. “O Peter,” she cried, “if she would only
stand still and let me see her!”

“They hardly ever stand still,” he said, but for one moment Wendy saw
the romantic figure come to rest on the cuckoo clock. “O the lovely!”
 she cried, though Tink's face was still distorted with passion.

“Tink,” said Peter amiably, “this lady says she wishes you were her
fairy.”

Tinker Bell answered insolently.

“What does she say, Peter?”

He had to translate. “She is not very polite. She says you are a great
[huge] ugly girl, and that she is my fairy.”

He tried to argue with Tink. “You know you can't be my fairy, Tink,
because I am an gentleman and you are a lady.”

To this Tink replied in these words, “You silly ass,” and disappeared
into the bathroom. “She is quite a common fairy,” Peter explained
apologetically, “she is called Tinker Bell because she mends the pots
and kettles [tinker = tin worker].” [Similar to “cinder” plus “elle” to
get Cinderella]

They were together in the armchair by this time, and Wendy plied him
with more questions.

“If you don't live in Kensington Gardens now--”

“Sometimes I do still.”

“But where do you live mostly now?”

“With the lost boys.”

“Who are they?”

“They are the children who fall out of their perambulators when the
nurse is looking the other way. If they are not claimed in seven
days they are sent far away to the Neverland to defray expenses. I'm
captain.”

“What fun it must be!”

“Yes,” said cunning Peter, “but we are rather lonely. You see we have no
female companionship.”

“Are none of the others girls?”

“Oh, no; girls, you know, are much too clever to fall out of their
prams.”

This flattered Wendy immensely. “I think,” she said, “it is perfectly
lovely the way you talk about girls; John there just despises us.”

For reply Peter rose and kicked John out of bed, blankets and all; one
kick. This seemed to Wendy rather forward for a first meeting, and she
told him with spirit that he was not captain in her house. However,
John continued to sleep so placidly on the floor that she allowed him
to remain there. “And I know you meant to be kind,” she said, relenting,
“so you may give me a kiss.”

For the moment she had forgotten his ignorance about kisses. “I thought
you would want it back,” he said a little bitterly, and offered to
return her the thimble.

“Oh dear,” said the nice Wendy, “I don't mean a kiss, I mean a thimble.”

“What's that?”

“It's like this.” She kissed him.

“Funny!” said Peter gravely. “Now shall I give you a thimble?”

“If you wish to,” said Wendy, keeping her head erect this time.

Peter thimbled her, and almost immediately she screeched. “What is it,
Wendy?”

“It was exactly as if someone were pulling my hair.”

“That must have been Tink. I never knew her so naughty before.”

And indeed Tink was darting about again, using offensive language.

“She says she will do that to you, Wendy, every time I give you a
thimble.”

“But why?”

“Why, Tink?”

Again Tink replied, “You silly ass.” Peter could not understand why,
but Wendy understood, and she was just slightly disappointed when he
admitted that he came to the nursery window not to see her but to listen
to stories.

“You see, I don't know any stories. None of the lost boys knows any
stories.”

“How perfectly awful,” Wendy said.

“Do you know,” Peter asked “why swallows build in the eaves of houses?
It is to listen to the stories. O Wendy, your mother was telling you
such a lovely story.”

“Which story was it?”

“About the prince who couldn't find the lady who wore the glass
slipper.”

“Peter,” said Wendy excitedly, “that was Cinderella, and he found her,
and they lived happily ever after.”

Peter was so glad that he rose from the floor, where they had been
sitting, and hurried to the window.

“Where are you going?” she cried with misgiving.

“To tell the other boys.”

“Don't go Peter,” she entreated, “I know such lots of stories.”

Those were her precise words, so there can be no denying that it was she
who first tempted him.

He came back, and there was a greedy look in his eyes now which ought to
have alarmed her, but did not.

“Oh, the stories I could tell to the boys!” she cried, and then Peter
gripped her and began to draw her toward the window.

“Let me go!” she ordered him.

“Wendy, do come with me and tell the other boys.”

Of course she was very pleased to be asked, but she said, “Oh dear, I
can't. Think of mummy! Besides, I can't fly.”

“I'll teach you.”

“Oh, how lovely to fly.”

“I'll teach you how to jump on the wind's back, and then away we go.”

“Oo!” she exclaimed rapturously.

“Wendy, Wendy, when you are sleeping in your silly bed you might be
flying about with me saying funny things to the stars.”

“Oo!”

“And, Wendy, there are mermaids.”

“Mermaids! With tails?”

“Such long tails.”

“Oh,” cried Wendy, “to see a mermaid!”

He had become frightfully cunning. “Wendy,” he said, “how we should all
respect you.”

She was wriggling her body in distress. It was quite as if she were
trying to remain on the nursery floor.

But he had no pity for her.

“Wendy,” he said, the sly one, “you could tuck us in at night.”

“Oo!”

“None of us has ever been tucked in at night.”

“Oo,” and her arms went out to him.

“And you could darn our clothes, and make pockets for us. None of us has
any pockets.”

How could she resist. “Of course it's awfully fascinating!” she cried.
“Peter, would you teach John and Michael to fly too?”

“If you like,” he said indifferently, and she ran to John and Michael
and shook them. “Wake up,” she cried, “Peter Pan has come and he is to
teach us to fly.”

John rubbed his eyes. “Then I shall get up,” he said. Of course he was
on the floor already. “Hallo,” he said, “I am up!”

Michael was up by this time also, looking as sharp as a knife with six
blades and a saw, but Peter suddenly signed silence. Their faces assumed
the awful craftiness of children listening for sounds from the grown-up
world. All was as still as salt. Then everything was right. No, stop!
Everything was wrong. Nana, who had been barking distressfully all the
evening, was quiet now. It was her silence they had heard.

“Out with the light! Hide! Quick!” cried John, taking command for the
only time throughout the whole adventure. And thus when Liza entered,
holding Nana, the nursery seemed quite its old self, very dark, and
you would have sworn you heard its three wicked inmates breathing
angelically as they slept. They were really doing it artfully from
behind the window curtains.

Liza was in a bad temper, for she was mixing the Christmas puddings in
the kitchen, and had been drawn from them, with a raisin still on her
cheek, by Nana's absurd suspicions. She thought the best way of getting
a little quiet was to take Nana to the nursery for a moment, but in
custody of course.

“There, you suspicious brute,” she said, not sorry that Nana was in
disgrace. “They are perfectly safe, aren't they? Every one of the little
angels sound asleep in bed. Listen to their gentle breathing.”

Here Michael, encouraged by his success, breathed so loudly that they
were nearly detected. Nana knew that kind of breathing, and she tried to
drag herself out of Liza's clutches.

But Liza was dense. “No more of it, Nana,” she said sternly, pulling
her out of the room. “I warn you if you bark again I shall go straight
for master and missus and bring them home from the party, and then, oh,
won't master whip you, just.”

She tied the unhappy dog up again, but do you think Nana ceased to bark?
Bring master and missus home from the party! Why, that was just what she
wanted. Do you think she cared whether she was whipped so long as her
charges were safe? Unfortunately Liza returned to her puddings, and
Nana, seeing that no help would come from her, strained and strained at
the chain until at last she broke it. In another moment she had burst
into the dining-room of 27 and flung up her paws to heaven, her most
expressive way of making a communication. Mr. and Mrs. Darling knew at
once that something terrible was happening in their nursery, and without
a good-bye to their hostess they rushed into the street.

But it was now ten minutes since three scoundrels had been breathing
behind the curtains, and Peter Pan can do a great deal in ten minutes.

We now return to the nursery.

“It's all right,” John announced, emerging from his hiding-place. “I
say, Peter, can you really fly?”

Instead of troubling to answer him Peter flew around the room, taking
the mantelpiece on the way.

“How topping!” said John and Michael.

“How sweet!” cried Wendy.

“Yes, I'm sweet, oh, I am sweet!” said Peter, forgetting his manners
again.

It looked delightfully easy, and they tried it first from the floor and
then from the beds, but they always went down instead of up.

“I say, how do you do it?” asked John, rubbing his knee. He was quite a
practical boy.

“You just think lovely wonderful thoughts,” Peter explained, “and they
lift you up in the air.”

He showed them again.

“You're so nippy at it,” John said, “couldn't you do it very slowly
once?”

Peter did it both slowly and quickly. “I've got it now, Wendy!” cried
John, but soon he found he had not. Not one of them could fly an inch,
though even Michael was in words of two syllables, and Peter did not
know A from Z.

Of course Peter had been trifling with them, for no one can fly unless
the fairy dust has been blown on him. Fortunately, as we have mentioned,
one of his hands was messy with it, and he blew some on each of them,
with the most superb results.

“Now just wiggle your shoulders this way,” he said, “and let go.”

They were all on their beds, and gallant Michael let go first. He did
not quite mean to let go, but he did it, and immediately he was borne
across the room.

“I flewed!” he screamed while still in mid-air.

John let go and met Wendy near the bathroom.

“Oh, lovely!”

“Oh, ripping!”

“Look at me!”

“Look at me!”

“Look at me!”

They were not nearly so elegant as Peter, they could not help kicking a
little, but their heads were bobbing against the ceiling, and there is
almost nothing so delicious as that. Peter gave Wendy a hand at first,
but had to desist, Tink was so indignant.

Up and down they went, and round and round. Heavenly was Wendy's word.

“I say,” cried John, “why shouldn't we all go out?”

Of course it was to this that Peter had been luring them.

Michael was ready: he wanted to see how long it took him to do a billion
miles. But Wendy hesitated.

“Mermaids!” said Peter again.

“Oo!”

“And there are pirates.”

“Pirates,” cried John, seizing his Sunday hat, “let us go at once.”

It was just at this moment that Mr. and Mrs. Darling hurried with Nana
out of 27. They ran into the middle of the street to look up at the
nursery window; and, yes, it was still shut, but the room was ablaze
with light, and most heart-gripping sight of all, they could see in
shadow on the curtain three little figures in night attire circling
round and round, not on the floor but in the air.

Not three figures, four!

In a tremble they opened the street door. Mr. Darling would have rushed
upstairs, but Mrs. Darling signed him to go softly. She even tried to
make her heart go softly.

Will they reach the nursery in time? If so, how delightful for them, and
we shall all breathe a sigh of relief, but there will be no story. On
the other hand, if they are not in time, I solemnly promise that it will
all come right in the end.

They would have reached the nursery in time had it not been that the
little stars were watching them. Once again the stars blew the window
open, and that smallest star of all called out:

“Cave, Peter!”

Then Peter knew that there was not a moment to lose. “Come,” he cried
imperiously, and soared out at once into the night, followed by John and
Michael and Wendy.

Mr. and Mrs. Darling and Nana rushed into the nursery too late. The
birds were flown.




Chapter 4 THE FLIGHT

“Second to the right, and straight on till morning.”

That, Peter had told Wendy, was the way to the Neverland; but even
birds, carrying maps and consulting them at windy corners, could not
have sighted it with these instructions. Peter, you see, just said
anything that came into his head.

At first his companions trusted him implicitly, and so great were the
delights of flying that they wasted time circling round church spires or
any other tall objects on the way that took their fancy.

John and Michael raced, Michael getting a start.

They recalled with contempt that not so long ago they had thought
themselves fine fellows for being able to fly round a room.

Not long ago. But how long ago? They were flying over the sea before
this thought began to disturb Wendy seriously. John thought it was their
second sea and their third night.

Sometimes it was dark and sometimes light, and now they were very cold
and again too warm. Did they really feel hungry at times, or were they
merely pretending, because Peter had such a jolly new way of feeding
them? His way was to pursue birds who had food in their mouths suitable
for humans and snatch it from them; then the birds would follow and
snatch it back; and they would all go chasing each other gaily for
miles, parting at last with mutual expressions of good-will. But Wendy
noticed with gentle concern that Peter did not seem to know that this
was rather an odd way of getting your bread and butter, nor even that
there are other ways.

Certainly they did not pretend to be sleepy, they were sleepy; and that
was a danger, for the moment they popped off, down they fell. The awful
thing was that Peter thought this funny.

“There he goes again!” he would cry gleefully, as Michael suddenly
dropped like a stone.

“Save him, save him!” cried Wendy, looking with horror at the cruel
sea far below. Eventually Peter would dive through the air, and catch
Michael just before he could strike the sea, and it was lovely the way
he did it; but he always waited till the last moment, and you felt it
was his cleverness that interested him and not the saving of human life.
Also he was fond of variety, and the sport that engrossed him one moment
would suddenly cease to engage him, so there was always the possibility
that the next time you fell he would let you go.

He could sleep in the air without falling, by merely lying on his back
and floating, but this was, partly at least, because he was so light
that if you got behind him and blew he went faster.

“Do be more polite to him,” Wendy whispered to John, when they were
playing “Follow my Leader.”

“Then tell him to stop showing off,” said John.

When playing Follow my Leader, Peter would fly close to the water and
touch each shark's tail in passing, just as in the street you may run
your finger along an iron railing. They could not follow him in this
with much success, so perhaps it was rather like showing off, especially
as he kept looking behind to see how many tails they missed.

“You must be nice to him,” Wendy impressed on her brothers. “What could
we do if he were to leave us!”

“We could go back,” Michael said.

“How could we ever find our way back without him?”

“Well, then, we could go on,” said John.

“That is the awful thing, John. We should have to go on, for we don't
know how to stop.”

This was true, Peter had forgotten to show them how to stop.

John said that if the worst came to the worst, all they had to do was to
go straight on, for the world was round, and so in time they must come
back to their own window.

“And who is to get food for us, John?”

“I nipped a bit out of that eagle's mouth pretty neatly, Wendy.”

“After the twentieth try,” Wendy reminded him. “And even though we
became good at picking up food, see how we bump against clouds and things
if he is not near to give us a hand.”

Indeed they were constantly bumping. They could now fly strongly, though
they still kicked far too much; but if they saw a cloud in front of
them, the more they tried to avoid it, the more certainly did they bump
into it. If Nana had been with them, she would have had a bandage round
Michael's forehead by this time.

Peter was not with them for the moment, and they felt rather lonely up
there by themselves. He could go so much faster than they that he would
suddenly shoot out of sight, to have some adventure in which they had no
share. He would come down laughing over something fearfully funny he had
been saying to a star, but he had already forgotten what it was, or he
would come up with mermaid scales still sticking to him, and yet not be
able to say for certain what had been happening. It was really rather
irritating to children who had never seen a mermaid.

“And if he forgets them so quickly,” Wendy argued, “how can we expect
that he will go on remembering us?”

Indeed, sometimes when he returned he did not remember them, at least
not well. Wendy was sure of it. She saw recognition come into his eyes
as he was about to pass them the time of day and go on; once even she
had to call him by name.

“I'm Wendy,” she said agitatedly.

He was very sorry. “I say, Wendy,” he whispered to her, “always if you
see me forgetting you, just keep on saying 'I'm Wendy,' and then I'll
remember.”

Of course this was rather unsatisfactory. However, to make amends he
showed them how to lie out flat on a strong wind that was going their
way, and this was such a pleasant change that they tried it several
times and found that they could sleep thus with security. Indeed they
would have slept longer, but Peter tired quickly of sleeping, and soon
he would cry in his captain voice, “We get off here.” So with occasional
tiffs, but on the whole rollicking, they drew near the Neverland; for
after many moons they did reach it, and, what is more, they had been
going pretty straight all the time, not perhaps so much owing to the
guidance of Peter or Tink as because the island was looking for them. It
is only thus that any one may sight those magic shores.

“There it is,” said Peter calmly.

“Where, where?”

“Where all the arrows are pointing.”

Indeed a million golden arrows were pointing it out to the children, all
directed by their friend the sun, who wanted them to be sure of their
way before leaving them for the night.

Wendy and John and Michael stood on tip-toe in the air to get their
first sight of the island. Strange to say, they all recognized it at
once, and until fear fell upon them they hailed it, not as something
long dreamt of and seen at last, but as a familiar friend to whom they
were returning home for the holidays.

“John, there's the lagoon.”

“Wendy, look at the turtles burying their eggs in the sand.”

“I say, John, I see your flamingo with the broken leg!”

“Look, Michael, there's your cave!”

“John, what's that in the brushwood?”

“It's a wolf with her whelps. Wendy, I do believe that's your little
whelp!”

“There's my boat, John, with her sides stove in!”

“No, it isn't. Why, we burned your boat.”

“That's her, at any rate. I say, John, I see the smoke of the redskin
camp!”

“Where? Show me, and I'll tell you by the way smoke curls whether they
are on the war-path.”

“There, just across the Mysterious River.”

“I see now. Yes, they are on the war-path right enough.”

Peter was a little annoyed with them for knowing so much, but if he
wanted to lord it over them his triumph was at hand, for have I not told
you that anon fear fell upon them?

It came as the arrows went, leaving the island in gloom.

In the old days at home the Neverland had always begun to look a little
dark and threatening by bedtime. Then unexplored patches arose in it
and spread, black shadows moved about in them, the roar of the beasts of
prey was quite different now, and above all, you lost the certainty that
you would win. You were quite glad that the night-lights were on. You
even liked Nana to say that this was just the mantelpiece over here, and
that the Neverland was all make-believe.

Of course the Neverland had been make-believe in those days, but it
was real now, and there were no night-lights, and it was getting darker
every moment, and where was Nana?

They had been flying apart, but they huddled close to Peter now. His
careless manner had gone at last, his eyes were sparkling, and a tingle
went through them every time they touched his body. They were now over
the fearsome island, flying so low that sometimes a tree grazed their
feet. Nothing horrid was visible in the air, yet their progress had
become slow and laboured, exactly as if they were pushing their way
through hostile forces. Sometimes they hung in the air until Peter had
beaten on it with his fists.

“They don't want us to land,” he explained.

“Who are they?” Wendy whispered, shuddering.

But he could not or would not say. Tinker Bell had been asleep on his
shoulder, but now he wakened her and sent her on in front.

Sometimes he poised himself in the air, listening intently, with his
hand to his ear, and again he would stare down with eyes so bright that
they seemed to bore two holes to earth. Having done these things, he
went on again.

His courage was almost appalling. “Would you like an adventure now,” he
said casually to John, “or would you like to have your tea first?”

Wendy said “tea first” quickly, and Michael pressed her hand in
gratitude, but the braver John hesitated.

“What kind of adventure?” he asked cautiously.

“There's a pirate asleep in the pampas just beneath us,” Peter told him.
“If you like, we'll go down and kill him.”

“I don't see him,” John said after a long pause.

“I do.”

“Suppose,” John said, a little huskily, “he were to wake up.”

Peter spoke indignantly. “You don't think I would kill him while he was
sleeping! I would wake him first, and then kill him. That's the way I
always do.”

“I say! Do you kill many?”

“Tons.”

John said “How ripping,” but decided to have tea first. He asked if
there were many pirates on the island just now, and Peter said he had
never known so many.

“Who is captain now?”

“Hook,” answered Peter, and his face became very stern as he said that
hated word.

“Jas. Hook?”

“Ay.”

Then indeed Michael began to cry, and even John could speak in gulps
only, for they knew Hook's reputation.

“He was Blackbeard's bo'sun,” John whispered huskily. “He is the worst
of them all. He is the only man of whom Barbecue was afraid.”

“That's him,” said Peter.

“What is he like? Is he big?”

“He is not so big as he was.”

“How do you mean?”

“I cut off a bit of him.”

“You!”

“Yes, me,” said Peter sharply.

“I wasn't meaning to be disrespectful.”

“Oh, all right.”

“But, I say, what bit?”

“His right hand.”

“Then he can't fight now?”

“Oh, can't he just!”

“Left-hander?”

“He has an iron hook instead of a right hand, and he claws with it.”

“Claws!”

“I say, John,” said Peter.

“Yes.”

“Say, 'Ay, ay, sir.'”

“Ay, ay, sir.”

“There is one thing,” Peter continued, “that every boy who serves under
me has to promise, and so must you.”

John paled.

“It is this, if we meet Hook in open fight, you must leave him to me.”

“I promise,” John said loyally.

For the moment they were feeling less eerie, because Tink was flying
with them, and in her light they could distinguish each other.
Unfortunately she could not fly so slowly as they, and so she had to go
round and round them in a circle in which they moved as in a halo. Wendy
quite liked it, until Peter pointed out the drawbacks.

“She tells me,” he said, “that the pirates sighted us before the
darkness came, and got Long Tom out.”

“The big gun?”

“Yes. And of course they must see her light, and if they guess we are
near it they are sure to let fly.”

“Wendy!”

“John!”

“Michael!”

“Tell her to go away at once, Peter,” the three cried simultaneously,
but he refused.

“She thinks we have lost the way,” he replied stiffly, “and she is
rather frightened. You don't think I would send her away all by herself
when she is frightened!”

For a moment the circle of light was broken, and something gave Peter a
loving little pinch.

“Then tell her,” Wendy begged, “to put out her light.”

“She can't put it out. That is about the only thing fairies can't do. It
just goes out of itself when she falls asleep, same as the stars.”

“Then tell her to sleep at once,” John almost ordered.

“She can't sleep except when she's sleepy. It is the only other thing
fairies can't do.”

“Seems to me,” growled John, “these are the only two things worth
doing.”

Here he got a pinch, but not a loving one.

“If only one of us had a pocket,” Peter said, “we could carry her in
it.” However, they had set off in such a hurry that there was not a
pocket between the four of them.

He had a happy idea. John's hat!

Tink agreed to travel by hat if it was carried in the hand. John carried
it, though she had hoped to be carried by Peter. Presently Wendy took
the hat, because John said it struck against his knee as he flew; and
this, as we shall see, led to mischief, for Tinker Bell hated to be
under an obligation to Wendy.

In the black topper the light was completely hidden, and they flew on in
silence. It was the stillest silence they had ever known, broken once by
a distant lapping, which Peter explained was the wild beasts drinking at
the ford, and again by a rasping sound that might have been the branches
of trees rubbing together, but he said it was the redskins sharpening
their knives.

Even these noises ceased. To Michael the loneliness was dreadful. “If
only something would make a sound!” he cried.

As if in answer to his request, the air was rent by the most tremendous
crash he had ever heard. The pirates had fired Long Tom at them.

The roar of it echoed through the mountains, and the echoes seemed to
cry savagely, “Where are they, where are they, where are they?”

Thus sharply did the terrified three learn the difference between an
island of make-believe and the same island come true.

When at last the heavens were steady again, John and Michael
found themselves alone in the darkness. John was treading the air
mechanically, and Michael without knowing how to float was floating.

“Are you shot?” John whispered tremulously.

“I haven't tried [myself out] yet,” Michael whispered back.

We know now that no one had been hit. Peter, however, had been carried
by the wind of the shot far out to sea, while Wendy was blown upwards
with no companion but Tinker Bell.

It would have been well for Wendy if at that moment she had dropped the
hat.

I don't know whether the idea came suddenly to Tink, or whether she had
planned it on the way, but she at once popped out of the hat and began
to lure Wendy to her destruction.

Tink was not all bad; or, rather, she was all bad just now, but, on the
other hand, sometimes she was all good. Fairies have to be one thing or
the other, because being so small they unfortunately have room for one
feeling only at a time. They are, however, allowed to change, only it
must be a complete change. At present she was full of jealousy of Wendy.
What she said in her lovely tinkle Wendy could not of course understand,
and I believe some of it was bad words, but it sounded kind, and she
flew back and forward, plainly meaning “Follow me, and all will be
well.”

What else could poor Wendy do? She called to Peter and John and Michael,
and got only mocking echoes in reply. She did not yet know that Tink
hated her with the fierce hatred of a very woman. And so, bewildered,
and now staggering in her flight, she followed Tink to her doom.




Chapter 5 THE ISLAND COME TRUE

Feeling that Peter was on his way back, the Neverland had again woke
into life. We ought to use the pluperfect and say wakened, but woke is
better and was always used by Peter.

In his absence things are usually quiet on the island. The fairies take
an hour longer in the morning, the beasts attend to their young, the
redskins feed heavily for six days and nights, and when pirates and
lost boys meet they merely bite their thumbs at each other. But with the
coming of Peter, who hates lethargy, they are under way again: if you
put your ear to the ground now, you would hear the whole island seething
with life.

On this evening the chief forces of the island were disposed as follows.
The lost boys were out looking for Peter, the pirates were out looking
for the lost boys, the redskins were out looking for the pirates, and
the beasts were out looking for the redskins. They were going round and
round the island, but they did not meet because all were going at the
same rate.

All wanted blood except the boys, who liked it as a rule, but to-night
were out to greet their captain. The boys on the island vary, of course,
in numbers, according as they get killed and so on; and when they seem
to be growing up, which is against the rules, Peter thins them out; but
at this time there were six of them, counting the twins as two. Let us
pretend to lie here among the sugar-cane and watch them as they steal by
in single file, each with his hand on his dagger.

They are forbidden by Peter to look in the least like him, and they wear
the skins of the bears slain by themselves, in which they are so round
and furry that when they fall they roll. They have therefore become very
sure-footed.

The first to pass is Tootles, not the least brave but the most
unfortunate of all that gallant band. He had been in fewer adventures
than any of them, because the big things constantly happened just when
he had stepped round the corner; all would be quiet, he would take the
opportunity of going off to gather a few sticks for firewood, and
then when he returned the others would be sweeping up the blood. This
ill-luck had given a gentle melancholy to his countenance, but instead
of souring his nature had sweetened it, so that he was quite the
humblest of the boys. Poor kind Tootles, there is danger in the air for
you to-night. Take care lest an adventure is now offered you, which, if
accepted, will plunge you in deepest woe. Tootles, the fairy Tink, who
is bent on mischief this night is looking for a tool [for doing her
mischief], and she thinks you are the most easily tricked of the boys.
'Ware Tinker Bell.

Would that he could hear us, but we are not really on the island, and he
passes by, biting his knuckles.

Next comes Nibs, the gay and debonair, followed by Slightly, who cuts
whistles out of the trees and dances ecstatically to his own tunes.
Slightly is the most conceited of the boys. He thinks he remembers the
days before he was lost, with their manners and customs, and this has
given his nose an offensive tilt. Curly is fourth; he is a pickle, [a
person who gets in pickles-predicaments] and so often has he had to
deliver up his person when Peter said sternly, “Stand forth the one who
did this thing,” that now at the command he stands forth automatically
whether he has done it or not. Last come the Twins, who cannot be
described because we should be sure to be describing the wrong one.
Peter never quite knew what twins were, and his band were not allowed
to know anything he did not know, so these two were always vague about
themselves, and did their best to give satisfaction by keeping close
together in an apologetic sort of way.

The boys vanish in the gloom, and after a pause, but not a long pause,
for things go briskly on the island, come the pirates on their track. We
hear them before they are seen, and it is always the same dreadful song:

     “Avast belay, yo ho, heave to,
     A-pirating we go,
     And if we're parted by a shot
     We're sure to meet below!”

A more villainous-looking lot never hung in a row on Execution dock.
Here, a little in advance, ever and again with his head to the
ground listening, his great arms bare, pieces of eight in his ears as
ornaments, is the handsome Italian Cecco, who cut his name in letters
of blood on the back of the governor of the prison at Gao. That gigantic
black behind him has had many names since he dropped the one with
which dusky mothers still terrify their children on the banks of the
Guadjo-mo. Here is Bill Jukes, every inch of him tattooed, the same Bill
Jukes who got six dozen on the WALRUS from Flint before he would drop
the bag of moidores [Portuguese gold pieces]; and Cookson, said to
be Black Murphy's brother (but this was never proved), and Gentleman
Starkey, once an usher in a public school and still dainty in his ways
of killing; and Skylights (Morgan's Skylights); and the Irish bo'sun
Smee, an oddly genial man who stabbed, so to speak, without offence,
and was the only Non-conformist in Hook's crew; and Noodler, whose
hands were fixed on backwards; and Robt. Mullins and Alf Mason and many
another ruffian long known and feared on the Spanish Main.

In the midst of them, the blackest and largest in that dark setting,
reclined James Hook, or as he wrote himself, Jas. Hook, of whom it is
said he was the only man that the Sea-Cook feared. He lay at his ease in
a rough chariot drawn and propelled by his men, and instead of a right
hand he had the iron hook with which ever and anon he encouraged them
to increase their pace. As dogs this terrible man treated and addressed
them, and as dogs they obeyed him. In person he was cadaverous [dead
looking] and blackavized [dark faced], and his hair was dressed in long
curls, which at a little distance looked like black candles, and gave a
singularly threatening expression to his handsome countenance. His eyes
were of the blue of the forget-me-not, and of a profound melancholy,
save when he was plunging his hook into you, at which time two red spots
appeared in them and lit them up horribly. In manner, something of the
grand seigneur still clung to him, so that he even ripped you up with
an air, and I have been told that he was a RACONTEUR [storyteller] of
repute. He was never more sinister than when he was most polite,
which is probably the truest test of breeding; and the elegance of his
diction, even when he was swearing, no less than the distinction of his
demeanour, showed him one of a different cast from his crew. A man of
indomitable courage, it was said that the only thing he shied at was
the sight of his own blood, which was thick and of an unusual colour.
In dress he somewhat aped the attire associated with the name of Charles
II, having heard it said in some earlier period of his career that he
bore a strange resemblance to the ill-fated Stuarts; and in his mouth
he had a holder of his own contrivance which enabled him to smoke two
cigars at once. But undoubtedly the grimmest part of him was his iron
claw.

Let us now kill a pirate, to show Hook's method. Skylights will do. As
they pass, Skylights lurches clumsily against him, ruffling his lace
collar; the hook shoots forth, there is a tearing sound and one screech,
then the body is kicked aside, and the pirates pass on. He has not even
taken the cigars from his mouth.

Such is the terrible man against whom Peter Pan is pitted. Which will
win?

On the trail of the pirates, stealing noiselessly down the war-path,
which is not visible to inexperienced eyes, come the redskins, every one
of them with his eyes peeled. They carry tomahawks and knives, and their
naked bodies gleam with paint and oil. Strung around them are scalps, of
boys as well as of pirates, for these are the Piccaninny tribe, and not
to be confused with the softer-hearted Delawares or the Hurons. In
the van, on all fours, is Great Big Little Panther, a brave of so many
scalps that in his present position they somewhat impede his progress.
Bringing up the rear, the place of greatest danger, comes Tiger Lily,
proudly erect, a princess in her own right. She is the most beautiful
of dusky Dianas [Diana = goddess of the woods] and the belle of the
Piccaninnies, coquettish [flirting], cold and amorous [loving] by turns;
there is not a brave who would not have the wayward thing to wife, but
she staves off the altar with a hatchet. Observe how they pass over
fallen twigs without making the slightest noise. The only sound to be
heard is their somewhat heavy breathing. The fact is that they are all a
little fat just now after the heavy gorging, but in time they will work
this off. For the moment, however, it constitutes their chief danger.

The redskins disappear as they have come like shadows, and soon their
place is taken by the beasts, a great and motley procession: lions,
tigers, bears, and the innumerable smaller savage things that flee
from them, for every kind of beast, and, more particularly, all the
man-eaters, live cheek by jowl on the favoured island. Their tongues are
hanging out, they are hungry to-night.

When they have passed, comes the last figure of all, a gigantic
crocodile. We shall see for whom she is looking presently.

The crocodile passes, but soon the boys appear again, for the procession
must continue indefinitely until one of the parties stops or changes its
pace. Then quickly they will be on top of each other.

All are keeping a sharp look-out in front, but none suspects that the
danger may be creeping up from behind. This shows how real the island
was.

The first to fall out of the moving circle was the boys. They flung
themselves down on the sward [turf], close to their underground home.

“I do wish Peter would come back,” every one of them said nervously,
though in height and still more in breadth they were all larger than
their captain.

“I am the only one who is not afraid of the pirates,” Slightly said, in
the tone that prevented his being a general favourite; but perhaps some
distant sound disturbed him, for he added hastily, “but I wish he
would come back, and tell us whether he has heard anything more about
Cinderella.”

They talked of Cinderella, and Tootles was confident that his mother
must have been very like her.

It was only in Peter's absence that they could speak of mothers, the
subject being forbidden by him as silly.

“All I remember about my mother,” Nibs told them, “is that she often
said to my father, 'Oh, how I wish I had a cheque-book of my own!' I
don't know what a cheque-book is, but I should just love to give my
mother one.”

While they talked they heard a distant sound. You or I, not being wild
things of the woods, would have heard nothing, but they heard it, and it
was the grim song:

     “Yo ho, yo ho, the pirate life,
     The flag o' skull and bones,
     A merry hour, a hempen rope,
     And hey for Davy Jones.”

At once the lost boys--but where are they? They are no longer there.
Rabbits could not have disappeared more quickly.

I will tell you where they are. With the exception of Nibs, who has
darted away to reconnoitre [look around], they are already in their home
under the ground, a very delightful residence of which we shall see
a good deal presently. But how have they reached it? for there is no
entrance to be seen, not so much as a large stone, which if rolled away,
would disclose the mouth of a cave. Look closely, however, and you may
note that there are here seven large trees, each with a hole in its
hollow trunk as large as a boy. These are the seven entrances to the
home under the ground, for which Hook has been searching in vain these
many moons. Will he find it tonight?

As the pirates advanced, the quick eye of Starkey sighted Nibs
disappearing through the wood, and at once his pistol flashed out. But
an iron claw gripped his shoulder.

“Captain, let go!” he cried, writhing.

Now for the first time we hear the voice of Hook. It was a black voice.
“Put back that pistol first,” it said threateningly.

“It was one of those boys you hate. I could have shot him dead.”

“Ay, and the sound would have brought Tiger Lily's redskins upon us. Do
you want to lose your scalp?”

“Shall I after him, Captain,” asked pathetic Smee, “and tickle him
with Johnny Corkscrew?” Smee had pleasant names for everything, and his
cutlass was Johnny Corkscrew, because he wiggled it in the wound. One
could mention many lovable traits in Smee. For instance, after killing,
it was his spectacles he wiped instead of his weapon.

“Johnny's a silent fellow,” he reminded Hook.

“Not now, Smee,” Hook said darkly. “He is only one, and I want to
mischief all the seven. Scatter and look for them.”

The pirates disappeared among the trees, and in a moment their Captain
and Smee were alone. Hook heaved a heavy sigh, and I know not why it
was, perhaps it was because of the soft beauty of the evening, but there
came over him a desire to confide to his faithful bo'sun the story of
his life. He spoke long and earnestly, but what it was all about Smee,
who was rather stupid, did not know in the least.

Anon [later] he caught the word Peter.

“Most of all,” Hook was saying passionately, “I want their captain,
Peter Pan. 'Twas he cut off my arm.” He brandished the hook
threateningly. “I've waited long to shake his hand with this. Oh, I'll
tear him!”

“And yet,” said Smee, “I have often heard you say that hook was worth a
score of hands, for combing the hair and other homely uses.”

“Ay,” the captain answered, “if I was a mother I would pray to have my
children born with this instead of that,” and he cast a look of pride
upon his iron hand and one of scorn upon the other. Then again he
frowned.

“Peter flung my arm,” he said, wincing, “to a crocodile that happened to
be passing by.”

“I have often,” said Smee, “noticed your strange dread of crocodiles.”

“Not of crocodiles,” Hook corrected him, “but of that one crocodile.” He
lowered his voice. “It liked my arm so much, Smee, that it has followed
me ever since, from sea to sea and from land to land, licking its lips
for the rest of me.”

“In a way,” said Smee, “it's sort of a compliment.”

“I want no such compliments,” Hook barked petulantly. “I want Peter Pan,
who first gave the brute its taste for me.”

He sat down on a large mushroom, and now there was a quiver in his
voice. “Smee,” he said huskily, “that crocodile would have had me before
this, but by a lucky chance it swallowed a clock which goes tick tick
inside it, and so before it can reach me I hear the tick and bolt.” He
laughed, but in a hollow way.

“Some day,” said Smee, “the clock will run down, and then he'll get
you.”

Hook wetted his dry lips. “Ay,” he said, “that's the fear that haunts
me.”

Since sitting down he had felt curiously warm. “Smee,” he said, “this
seat is hot.” He jumped up. “Odds bobs, hammer and tongs I'm burning.”

They examined the mushroom, which was of a size and solidity unknown
on the mainland; they tried to pull it up, and it came away at once in
their hands, for it had no root. Stranger still, smoke began at once
to ascend. The pirates looked at each other. “A chimney!” they both
exclaimed.

They had indeed discovered the chimney of the home under the ground. It
was the custom of the boys to stop it with a mushroom when enemies were
in the neighbourhood.

Not only smoke came out of it. There came also children's voices, for
so safe did the boys feel in their hiding-place that they were gaily
chattering. The pirates listened grimly, and then replaced the mushroom.
They looked around them and noted the holes in the seven trees.

“Did you hear them say Peter Pan's from home?” Smee whispered, fidgeting
with Johnny Corkscrew.

Hook nodded. He stood for a long time lost in thought, and at last a
curdling smile lit up his swarthy face. Smee had been waiting for it.
“Unrip your plan, captain,” he cried eagerly.

“To return to the ship,” Hook replied slowly through his teeth, “and
cook a large rich cake of a jolly thickness with green sugar on it.
There can be but one room below, for there is but one chimney. The silly
moles had not the sense to see that they did not need a door apiece.
That shows they have no mother. We will leave the cake on the shore
of the Mermaids' Lagoon. These boys are always swimming about there,
playing with the mermaids. They will find the cake and they will gobble
it up, because, having no mother, they don't know how dangerous 'tis to
eat rich damp cake.” He burst into laughter, not hollow laughter now,
but honest laughter. “Aha, they will die.”

Smee had listened with growing admiration.

“It's the wickedest, prettiest policy ever I heard of!” he cried, and in
their exultation they danced and sang:

     “Avast, belay, when I appear,
     By fear they're overtook;
     Nought's left upon your bones when you
     Have shaken claws with Hook.”

They began the verse, but they never finished it, for another sound
broke in and stilled them. There was at first such a tiny sound that a
leaf might have fallen on it and smothered it, but as it came nearer it
was more distinct.

Tick tick tick tick!

Hook stood shuddering, one foot in the air.

“The crocodile!” he gasped, and bounded away, followed by his bo'sun.

It was indeed the crocodile. It had passed the redskins, who were now on
the trail of the other pirates. It oozed on after Hook.

Once more the boys emerged into the open; but the dangers of the night
were not yet over, for presently Nibs rushed breathless into their
midst, pursued by a pack of wolves. The tongues of the pursuers were
hanging out; the baying of them was horrible.

“Save me, save me!” cried Nibs, falling on the ground.

“But what can we do, what can we do?”

It was a high compliment to Peter that at that dire moment their
thoughts turned to him.

“What would Peter do?” they cried simultaneously.

Almost in the same breath they cried, “Peter would look at them through
his legs.”

And then, “Let us do what Peter would do.”

It is quite the most successful way of defying wolves, and as one boy
they bent and looked through their legs. The next moment is the long
one, but victory came quickly, for as the boys advanced upon them in the
terrible attitude, the wolves dropped their tails and fled.

Now Nibs rose from the ground, and the others thought that his staring
eyes still saw the wolves. But it was not wolves he saw.

“I have seen a wonderfuller thing,” he cried, as they gathered round him
eagerly. “A great white bird. It is flying this way.”

“What kind of a bird, do you think?”

“I don't know,” Nibs said, awestruck, “but it looks so weary, and as it
flies it moans, 'Poor Wendy.'”

“Poor Wendy?”

“I remember,” said Slightly instantly, “there are birds called Wendies.”

“See, it comes!” cried Curly, pointing to Wendy in the heavens.

Wendy was now almost overhead, and they could hear her plaintive cry.
But more distinct came the shrill voice of Tinker Bell. The jealous
fairy had now cast off all disguise of friendship, and was darting
at her victim from every direction, pinching savagely each time she
touched.

“Hullo, Tink,” cried the wondering boys.

Tink's reply rang out: “Peter wants you to shoot the Wendy.”

It was not in their nature to question when Peter ordered. “Let us do
what Peter wishes!” cried the simple boys. “Quick, bows and arrows!”

All but Tootles popped down their trees. He had a bow and arrow with
him, and Tink noted it, and rubbed her little hands.

“Quick, Tootles, quick,” she screamed. “Peter will be so pleased.”

Tootles excitedly fitted the arrow to his bow. “Out of the way, Tink,”
 he shouted, and then he fired, and Wendy fluttered to the ground with an
arrow in her breast.




Chapter 6 THE LITTLE HOUSE

Foolish Tootles was standing like a conqueror over Wendy's body when the
other boys sprang, armed, from their trees.

“You are too late,” he cried proudly, “I have shot the Wendy. Peter will
be so pleased with me.”

Overhead Tinker Bell shouted “Silly ass!” and darted into hiding. The
others did not hear her. They had crowded round Wendy, and as they
looked a terrible silence fell upon the wood. If Wendy's heart had been
beating they would all have heard it.

Slightly was the first to speak. “This is no bird,” he said in a scared
voice. “I think this must be a lady.”

“A lady?” said Tootles, and fell a-trembling.

“And we have killed her,” Nibs said hoarsely.

They all whipped off their caps.

“Now I see,” Curly said: “Peter was bringing her to us.” He threw
himself sorrowfully on the ground.

“A lady to take care of us at last,” said one of the twins, “and you
have killed her!”

They were sorry for him, but sorrier for themselves, and when he took a
step nearer them they turned from him.

Tootles' face was very white, but there was a dignity about him now that
had never been there before.

“I did it,” he said, reflecting. “When ladies used to come to me in
dreams, I said, 'Pretty mother, pretty mother.' But when at last she
really came, I shot her.”

He moved slowly away.

“Don't go,” they called in pity.

“I must,” he answered, shaking; “I am so afraid of Peter.”

It was at this tragic moment that they heard a sound which made the
heart of every one of them rise to his mouth. They heard Peter crow.

“Peter!” they cried, for it was always thus that he signalled his
return.

“Hide her,” they whispered, and gathered hastily around Wendy. But
Tootles stood aloof.

Again came that ringing crow, and Peter dropped in front of them.
“Greetings, boys,” he cried, and mechanically they saluted, and then
again was silence.

He frowned.

“I am back,” he said hotly, “why do you not cheer?”

They opened their mouths, but the cheers would not come. He overlooked
it in his haste to tell the glorious tidings.

“Great news, boys,” he cried, “I have brought at last a mother for you
all.”

Still no sound, except a little thud from Tootles as he dropped on his
knees.

“Have you not seen her?” asked Peter, becoming troubled. “She flew this
way.”

“Ah me!” one voice said, and another said, “Oh, mournful day.”

Tootles rose. “Peter,” he said quietly, “I will show her to you,” and
when the others would still have hidden her he said, “Back, twins, let
Peter see.”

So they all stood back, and let him see, and after he had looked for a
little time he did not know what to do next.

“She is dead,” he said uncomfortably. “Perhaps she is frightened at
being dead.”

He thought of hopping off in a comic sort of way till he was out of
sight of her, and then never going near the spot any more. They would
all have been glad to follow if he had done this.

But there was the arrow. He took it from her heart and faced his band.

“Whose arrow?” he demanded sternly.

“Mine, Peter,” said Tootles on his knees.

“Oh, dastard hand,” Peter said, and he raised the arrow to use it as a
dagger.

Tootles did not flinch. He bared his breast. “Strike, Peter,” he said
firmly, “strike true.”

Twice did Peter raise the arrow, and twice did his hand fall. “I cannot
strike,” he said with awe, “there is something stays my hand.”

All looked at him in wonder, save Nibs, who fortunately looked at Wendy.

“It is she,” he cried, “the Wendy lady, see, her arm!”

Wonderful to relate [tell], Wendy had raised her arm. Nibs bent over
her and listened reverently. “I think she said, 'Poor Tootles,'” he
whispered.

“She lives,” Peter said briefly.

Slightly cried instantly, “The Wendy lady lives.”

Then Peter knelt beside her and found his button. You remember she had
put it on a chain that she wore round her neck.

“See,” he said, “the arrow struck against this. It is the kiss I gave
her. It has saved her life.”

“I remember kisses,” Slightly interposed quickly, “let me see it. Ay,
that's a kiss.”

Peter did not hear him. He was begging Wendy to get better quickly, so
that he could show her the mermaids. Of course she could not answer yet,
being still in a frightful faint; but from overhead came a wailing note.

“Listen to Tink,” said Curly, “she is crying because the Wendy lives.”

Then they had to tell Peter of Tink's crime, and almost never had they
seen him look so stern.

“Listen, Tinker Bell,” he cried, “I am your friend no more. Begone from
me for ever.”

She flew on to his shoulder and pleaded, but he brushed her off. Not
until Wendy again raised her arm did he relent sufficiently to say,
“Well, not for ever, but for a whole week.”

Do you think Tinker Bell was grateful to Wendy for raising her arm? Oh
dear no, never wanted to pinch her so much. Fairies indeed are strange,
and Peter, who understood them best, often cuffed [slapped] them.

But what to do with Wendy in her present delicate state of health?

“Let us carry her down into the house,” Curly suggested.

“Ay,” said Slightly, “that is what one does with ladies.”

“No, no,” Peter said, “you must not touch her. It would not be
sufficiently respectful.”

“That,” said Slightly, “is what I was thinking.”

“But if she lies there,” Tootles said, “she will die.”

“Ay, she will die,” Slightly admitted, “but there is no way out.”

“Yes, there is,” cried Peter. “Let us build a little house round her.”

They were all delighted. “Quick,” he ordered them, “bring me each of you
the best of what we have. Gut our house. Be sharp.”

In a moment they were as busy as tailors the night before a wedding.
They skurried this way and that, down for bedding, up for firewood, and
while they were at it, who should appear but John and Michael. As they
dragged along the ground they fell asleep standing, stopped, woke up,
moved another step and slept again.

“John, John,” Michael would cry, “wake up! Where is Nana, John, and
mother?”

And then John would rub his eyes and mutter, “It is true, we did fly.”

You may be sure they were very relieved to find Peter.

“Hullo, Peter,” they said.

“Hullo,” replied Peter amicably, though he had quite forgotten them.
He was very busy at the moment measuring Wendy with his feet to see
how large a house she would need. Of course he meant to leave room for
chairs and a table. John and Michael watched him.

“Is Wendy asleep?” they asked.

“Yes.”

“John,” Michael proposed, “let us wake her and get her to make supper
for us,” but as he said it some of the other boys rushed on carrying
branches for the building of the house. “Look at them!” he cried.

“Curly,” said Peter in his most captainy voice, “see that these boys
help in the building of the house.”

“Ay, ay, sir.”

“Build a house?” exclaimed John.

“For the Wendy,” said Curly.

“For Wendy?” John said, aghast. “Why, she is only a girl!”

“That,” explained Curly, “is why we are her servants.”

“You? Wendy's servants!”

“Yes,” said Peter, “and you also. Away with them.”

The astounded brothers were dragged away to hack and hew and carry.
“Chairs and a fender [fireplace] first,” Peter ordered. “Then we shall
build a house round them.”

“Ay,” said Slightly, “that is how a house is built; it all comes back to
me.”

Peter thought of everything. “Slightly,” he cried, “fetch a doctor.”

“Ay, ay,” said Slightly at once, and disappeared, scratching his head.
But he knew Peter must be obeyed, and he returned in a moment, wearing
John's hat and looking solemn.

“Please, sir,” said Peter, going to him, “are you a doctor?”

The difference between him and the other boys at such a time was that
they knew it was make-believe, while to him make-believe and true were
exactly the same thing. This sometimes troubled them, as when they had
to make-believe that they had had their dinners.

If they broke down in their make-believe he rapped them on the knuckles.

“Yes, my little man,” Slightly anxiously replied, who had chapped
knuckles.

“Please, sir,” Peter explained, “a lady lies very ill.”

She was lying at their feet, but Slightly had the sense not to see her.

“Tut, tut, tut,” he said, “where does she lie?”

“In yonder glade.”

“I will put a glass thing in her mouth,” said Slightly, and he
made-believe to do it, while Peter waited. It was an anxious moment when
the glass thing was withdrawn.

“How is she?” inquired Peter.

“Tut, tut, tut,” said Slightly, “this has cured her.”

“I am glad!” Peter cried.

“I will call again in the evening,” Slightly said; “give her beef tea
out of a cup with a spout to it;” but after he had returned the hat
to John he blew big breaths, which was his habit on escaping from a
difficulty.

In the meantime the wood had been alive with the sound of axes; almost
everything needed for a cosy dwelling already lay at Wendy's feet.

“If only we knew,” said one, “the kind of house she likes best.”

“Peter,” shouted another, “she is moving in her sleep.”

“Her mouth opens,” cried a third, looking respectfully into it. “Oh,
lovely!”

“Perhaps she is going to sing in her sleep,” said Peter. “Wendy, sing
the kind of house you would like to have.”

Immediately, without opening her eyes, Wendy began to sing:

     “I wish I had a pretty house,
     The littlest ever seen,
     With funny little red walls
     And roof of mossy green.”

They gurgled with joy at this, for by the greatest good luck the
branches they had brought were sticky with red sap, and all the ground
was carpeted with moss. As they rattled up the little house they broke
into song themselves:

     “We've built the little walls and roof
     And made a lovely door,
     So tell us, mother Wendy,
     What are you wanting more?”

To this she answered greedily:

     “Oh, really next I think I'll have
     Gay windows all about,
     With roses peeping in, you know,
     And babies peeping out.”

With a blow of their fists they made windows, and large yellow leaves
were the blinds. But roses--?

“Roses,” cried Peter sternly.

Quickly they made-believe to grow the loveliest roses up the walls.

Babies?

To prevent Peter ordering babies they hurried into song again:

     “We've made the roses peeping out,
     The babes are at the door,
     We cannot make ourselves, you know,
     'cos we've been made before.”

Peter, seeing this to be a good idea, at once pretended that it was his
own. The house was quite beautiful, and no doubt Wendy was very cosy
within, though, of course, they could no longer see her. Peter strode
up and down, ordering finishing touches. Nothing escaped his eagle eyes.
Just when it seemed absolutely finished:

“There's no knocker on the door,” he said.

They were very ashamed, but Tootles gave the sole of his shoe, and it
made an excellent knocker.

Absolutely finished now, they thought.

Not of bit of it. “There's no chimney,” Peter said; “we must have a
chimney.”

“It certainly does need a chimney,” said John importantly. This gave
Peter an idea. He snatched the hat off John's head, knocked out the
bottom [top], and put the hat on the roof. The little house was so
pleased to have such a capital chimney that, as if to say thank you,
smoke immediately began to come out of the hat.

Now really and truly it was finished. Nothing remained to do but to
knock.

“All look your best,” Peter warned them; “first impressions are awfully
important.”

He was glad no one asked him what first impressions are; they were all
too busy looking their best.

He knocked politely, and now the wood was as still as the children, not
a sound to be heard except from Tinker Bell, who was watching from a
branch and openly sneering.

What the boys were wondering was, would any one answer the knock? If a
lady, what would she be like?

The door opened and a lady came out. It was Wendy. They all whipped off
their hats.

She looked properly surprised, and this was just how they had hoped she
would look.

“Where am I?” she said.

Of course Slightly was the first to get his word in. “Wendy lady,” he
said rapidly, “for you we built this house.”

“Oh, say you're pleased,” cried Nibs.

“Lovely, darling house,” Wendy said, and they were the very words they
had hoped she would say.

“And we are your children,” cried the twins.

Then all went on their knees, and holding out their arms cried, “O Wendy
lady, be our mother.”

“Ought I?” Wendy said, all shining. “Of course it's frightfully
fascinating, but you see I am only a little girl. I have no real
experience.”

“That doesn't matter,” said Peter, as if he were the only person present
who knew all about it, though he was really the one who knew least.
“What we need is just a nice motherly person.”

“Oh dear!” Wendy said, “you see, I feel that is exactly what I am.”

“It is, it is,” they all cried; “we saw it at once.”

“Very well,” she said, “I will do my best. Come inside at once, you
naughty children; I am sure your feet are damp. And before I put you to
bed I have just time to finish the story of Cinderella.”

In they went; I don't know how there was room for them, but you can
squeeze very tight in the Neverland. And that was the first of the many
joyous evenings they had with Wendy. By and by she tucked them up in the
great bed in the home under the trees, but she herself slept that night
in the little house, and Peter kept watch outside with drawn sword, for
the pirates could be heard carousing far away and the wolves were on the
prowl. The little house looked so cosy and safe in the darkness, with
a bright light showing through its blinds, and the chimney smoking
beautifully, and Peter standing on guard. After a time he fell asleep,
and some unsteady fairies had to climb over him on their way home from
an orgy. Any of the other boys obstructing the fairy path at night they
would have mischiefed, but they just tweaked Peter's nose and passed on.




Chapter 7 THE HOME UNDER THE GROUND

One of the first things Peter did next day was to measure Wendy and John
and Michael for hollow trees. Hook, you remember, had sneered at the
boys for thinking they needed a tree apiece, but this was ignorance, for
unless your tree fitted you it was difficult to go up and down, and no
two of the boys were quite the same size. Once you fitted, you drew in
[let out] your breath at the top, and down you went at exactly the
right speed, while to ascend you drew in and let out alternately, and so
wriggled up. Of course, when you have mastered the action you are able
to do these things without thinking of them, and nothing can be more
graceful.

But you simply must fit, and Peter measures you for your tree as
carefully as for a suit of clothes: the only difference being that the
clothes are made to fit you, while you have to be made to fit the tree.
Usually it is done quite easily, as by your wearing too many garments
or too few, but if you are bumpy in awkward places or the only available
tree is an odd shape, Peter does some things to you, and after that you
fit. Once you fit, great care must be taken to go on fitting, and this,
as Wendy was to discover to her delight, keeps a whole family in perfect
condition.

Wendy and Michael fitted their trees at the first try, but John had to
be altered a little.

After a few days' practice they could go up and down as gaily as buckets
in a well. And how ardently they grew to love their home under the
ground; especially Wendy. It consisted of one large room, as all houses
should do, with a floor in which you could dig [for worms] if you wanted
to go fishing, and in this floor grew stout mushrooms of a charming
colour, which were used as stools. A Never tree tried hard to grow in
the centre of the room, but every morning they sawed the trunk through,
level with the floor. By tea-time it was always about two feet high, and
then they put a door on top of it, the whole thus becoming a table;
as soon as they cleared away, they sawed off the trunk again, and thus
there was more room to play. There was an enormous fireplace which was
in almost any part of the room where you cared to light it, and across
this Wendy stretched strings, made of fibre, from which she suspended
her washing. The bed was tilted against the wall by day, and let down at
6:30, when it filled nearly half the room; and all the boys slept in it,
except Michael, lying like sardines in a tin. There was a strict rule
against turning round until one gave the signal, when all turned at
once. Michael should have used it also, but Wendy would have [desired]
a baby, and he was the littlest, and you know what women are, and the
short and long of it is that he was hung up in a basket.

It was rough and simple, and not unlike what baby bears would have made
of an underground house in the same circumstances. But there was one
recess in the wall, no larger than a bird-cage, which was the private
apartment of Tinker Bell. It could be shut off from the rest of
the house by a tiny curtain, which Tink, who was most fastidious
[particular], always kept drawn when dressing or undressing. No woman,
however large, could have had a more exquisite boudoir [dressing room]
and bed-chamber combined. The couch, as she always called it, was
a genuine Queen Mab, with club legs; and she varied the bedspreads
according to what fruit-blossom was in season. Her mirror was a
Puss-in-Boots, of which there are now only three, unchipped, known to
fairy dealers; the washstand was Pie-crust and reversible, the chest
of drawers an authentic Charming the Sixth, and the carpet and rugs the
best (the early) period of Margery and Robin. There was a chandelier
from Tiddlywinks for the look of the thing, but of course she lit the
residence herself. Tink was very contemptuous of the rest of the house,
as indeed was perhaps inevitable, and her chamber, though beautiful,
looked rather conceited, having the appearance of a nose permanently
turned up.

I suppose it was all especially entrancing to Wendy, because those
rampagious boys of hers gave her so much to do. Really there were whole
weeks when, except perhaps with a stocking in the evening, she was never
above ground. The cooking, I can tell you, kept her nose to the pot, and
even if there was nothing in it, even if there was no pot, she had to
keep watching that it came aboil just the same. You never exactly
knew whether there would be a real meal or just a make-believe, it all
depended upon Peter's whim: he could eat, really eat, if it was part of
a game, but he could not stodge [cram down the food] just to feel
stodgy [stuffed with food], which is what most children like better than
anything else; the next best thing being to talk about it. Make-believe
was so real to him that during a meal of it you could see him getting
rounder. Of course it was trying, but you simply had to follow his lead,
and if you could prove to him that you were getting loose for your tree
he let you stodge.

Wendy's favourite time for sewing and darning was after they had all
gone to bed. Then, as she expressed it, she had a breathing time for
herself; and she occupied it in making new things for them, and putting
double pieces on the knees, for they were all most frightfully hard on
their knees.

When she sat down to a basketful of their stockings, every heel with a
hole in it, she would fling up her arms and exclaim, “Oh dear, I am sure
I sometimes think spinsters are to be envied!”

Her face beamed when she exclaimed this.

You remember about her pet wolf. Well, it very soon discovered that she
had come to the island and it found her out, and they just ran into each
other's arms. After that it followed her about everywhere.

As time wore on did she think much about the beloved parents she had
left behind her? This is a difficult question, because it is quite
impossible to say how time does wear on in the Neverland, where it is
calculated by moons and suns, and there are ever so many more of them
than on the mainland. But I am afraid that Wendy did not really worry
about her father and mother; she was absolutely confident that they
would always keep the window open for her to fly back by, and this gave
her complete ease of mind. What did disturb her at times was that John
remembered his parents vaguely only, as people he had once known, while
Michael was quite willing to believe that she was really his mother.
These things scared her a little, and nobly anxious to do her duty, she
tried to fix the old life in their minds by setting them examination
papers on it, as like as possible to the ones she used to do at school.
The other boys thought this awfully interesting, and insisted on
joining, and they made slates for themselves, and sat round the table,
writing and thinking hard about the questions she had written on another
slate and passed round. They were the most ordinary questions--“What
was the colour of Mother's eyes? Which was taller, Father or Mother? Was
Mother blonde or brunette? Answer all three questions if possible.”
 “(A) Write an essay of not less than 40 words on How I spent my last
Holidays, or The Characters of Father and Mother compared. Only one of
these to be attempted.” Or “(1) Describe Mother's laugh; (2) Describe
Father's laugh; (3) Describe Mother's Party Dress; (4) Describe the
Kennel and its Inmate.”

They were just everyday questions like these, and when you could not
answer them you were told to make a cross; and it was really dreadful
what a number of crosses even John made. Of course the only boy who
replied to every question was Slightly, and no one could have been more
hopeful of coming out first, but his answers were perfectly ridiculous,
and he really came out last: a melancholy thing.

Peter did not compete. For one thing he despised all mothers except
Wendy, and for another he was the only boy on the island who could
neither write nor spell; not the smallest word. He was above all that
sort of thing.

By the way, the questions were all written in the past tense. What
was the colour of Mother's eyes, and so on. Wendy, you see, had been
forgetting, too.

Adventures, of course, as we shall see, were of daily occurrence; but
about this time Peter invented, with Wendy's help, a new game that
fascinated him enormously, until he suddenly had no more interest in it,
which, as you have been told, was what always happened with his games.
It consisted in pretending not to have adventures, in doing the sort of
thing John and Michael had been doing all their lives, sitting on stools
flinging balls in the air, pushing each other, going out for walks and
coming back without having killed so much as a grizzly. To see Peter
doing nothing on a stool was a great sight; he could not help looking
solemn at such times, to sit still seemed to him such a comic thing to
do. He boasted that he had gone walking for the good of his health. For
several suns these were the most novel of all adventures to him; and
John and Michael had to pretend to be delighted also; otherwise he would
have treated them severely.

He often went out alone, and when he came back you were never absolutely
certain whether he had had an adventure or not. He might have forgotten
it so completely that he said nothing about it; and then when you went
out you found the body; and, on the other hand, he might say a great
deal about it, and yet you could not find the body. Sometimes he came
home with his head bandaged, and then Wendy cooed over him and bathed
it in lukewarm water, while he told a dazzling tale. But she was never
quite sure, you know. There were, however, many adventures which she
knew to be true because she was in them herself, and there were still
more that were at least partly true, for the other boys were in them and
said they were wholly true. To describe them all would require a book as
large as an English-Latin, Latin-English Dictionary, and the most we can
do is to give one as a specimen of an average hour on the island. The
difficulty is which one to choose. Should we take the brush with the
redskins at Slightly Gulch? It was a sanguinary affair, and
especially interesting as showing one of Peter's peculiarities, which
was that in the middle of a fight he would suddenly change sides. At the
Gulch, when victory was still in the balance, sometimes leaning this way
and sometimes that, he called out, “I'm redskin to-day; what are you,
Tootles?” And Tootles answered, “Redskin; what are you, Nibs?” and
Nibs said, “Redskin; what are you Twin?” and so on; and they were all
redskins; and of course this would have ended the fight had not the real
redskins fascinated by Peter's methods, agreed to be lost boys for that
once, and so at it they all went again, more fiercely than ever.

The extraordinary upshot of this adventure was--but we have not decided
yet that this is the adventure we are to narrate. Perhaps a better one
would be the night attack by the redskins on the house under the ground,
when several of them stuck in the hollow trees and had to be pulled out
like corks. Or we might tell how Peter saved Tiger Lily's life in the
Mermaids' Lagoon, and so made her his ally.

Or we could tell of that cake the pirates cooked so that the boys might
eat it and perish; and how they placed it in one cunning spot after
another; but always Wendy snatched it from the hands of her children, so
that in time it lost its succulence, and became as hard as a stone, and
was used as a missile, and Hook fell over it in the dark.

Or suppose we tell of the birds that were Peter's friends, particularly
of the Never bird that built in a tree overhanging the lagoon, and how
the nest fell into the water, and still the bird sat on her eggs, and
Peter gave orders that she was not to be disturbed. That is a pretty
story, and the end shows how grateful a bird can be; but if we tell
it we must also tell the whole adventure of the lagoon, which would
of course be telling two adventures rather than just one. A shorter
adventure, and quite as exciting, was Tinker Bell's attempt, with the
help of some street fairies, to have the sleeping Wendy conveyed on a
great floating leaf to the mainland. Fortunately the leaf gave way and
Wendy woke, thinking it was bath-time, and swam back. Or again, we might
choose Peter's defiance of the lions, when he drew a circle round him
on the ground with an arrow and dared them to cross it; and though he
waited for hours, with the other boys and Wendy looking on breathlessly
from trees, not one of them dared to accept his challenge.

Which of these adventures shall we choose? The best way will be to toss
for it.

I have tossed, and the lagoon has won. This almost makes one wish that
the gulch or the cake or Tink's leaf had won. Of course I could do it
again, and make it best out of three; however, perhaps fairest to stick
to the lagoon.




Chapter 8 THE MERMAIDS' LAGOON

If you shut your eyes and are a lucky one, you may see at times a
shapeless pool of lovely pale colours suspended in the darkness; then
if you squeeze your eyes tighter, the pool begins to take shape, and the
colours become so vivid that with another squeeze they must go on fire.
But just before they go on fire you see the lagoon. This is the nearest
you ever get to it on the mainland, just one heavenly moment; if there
could be two moments you might see the surf and hear the mermaids
singing.

The children often spent long summer days on this lagoon, swimming or
floating most of the time, playing the mermaid games in the water,
and so forth. You must not think from this that the mermaids were on
friendly terms with them: on the contrary, it was among Wendy's lasting
regrets that all the time she was on the island she never had a civil
word from one of them. When she stole softly to the edge of the lagoon
she might see them by the score, especially on Marooners' Rock, where
they loved to bask, combing out their hair in a lazy way that quite
irritated her; or she might even swim, on tiptoe as it were, to within
a yard of them, but then they saw her and dived, probably splashing her
with their tails, not by accident, but intentionally.

They treated all the boys in the same way, except of course Peter, who
chatted with them on Marooners' Rock by the hour, and sat on their tails
when they got cheeky. He gave Wendy one of their combs.

The most haunting time at which to see them is at the turn of the moon,
when they utter strange wailing cries; but the lagoon is dangerous for
mortals then, and until the evening of which we have now to tell, Wendy
had never seen the lagoon by moonlight, less from fear, for of course
Peter would have accompanied her, than because she had strict rules
about every one being in bed by seven. She was often at the lagoon,
however, on sunny days after rain, when the mermaids come up in
extraordinary numbers to play with their bubbles. The bubbles of many
colours made in rainbow water they treat as balls, hitting them gaily
from one to another with their tails, and trying to keep them in the
rainbow till they burst. The goals are at each end of the rainbow, and
the keepers only are allowed to use their hands. Sometimes a dozen of
these games will be going on in the lagoon at a time, and it is quite a
pretty sight.

But the moment the children tried to join in they had to play by
themselves, for the mermaids immediately disappeared. Nevertheless we
have proof that they secretly watched the interlopers, and were not
above taking an idea from them; for John introduced a new way of hitting
the bubble, with the head instead of the hand, and the mermaids adopted
it. This is the one mark that John has left on the Neverland.

It must also have been rather pretty to see the children resting on a
rock for half an hour after their mid-day meal. Wendy insisted on
their doing this, and it had to be a real rest even though the meal was
make-believe. So they lay there in the sun, and their bodies glistened
in it, while she sat beside them and looked important.

It was one such day, and they were all on Marooners' Rock. The rock was
not much larger than their great bed, but of course they all knew how
not to take up much room, and they were dozing, or at least lying with
their eyes shut, and pinching occasionally when they thought Wendy was
not looking. She was very busy, stitching.

While she stitched a change came to the lagoon. Little shivers ran over
it, and the sun went away and shadows stole across the water, turning
it cold. Wendy could no longer see to thread her needle, and when she
looked up, the lagoon that had always hitherto been such a laughing
place seemed formidable and unfriendly.

It was not, she knew, that night had come, but something as dark as
night had come. No, worse than that. It had not come, but it had sent
that shiver through the sea to say that it was coming. What was it?

There crowded upon her all the stories she had been told of Marooners'
Rock, so called because evil captains put sailors on it and leave
them there to drown. They drown when the tide rises, for then it is
submerged.

Of course she should have roused the children at once; not merely
because of the unknown that was stalking toward them, but because it was
no longer good for them to sleep on a rock grown chilly. But she was
a young mother and she did not know this; she thought you simply must
stick to your rule about half an hour after the mid-day meal. So, though
fear was upon her, and she longed to hear male voices, she would not
waken them. Even when she heard the sound of muffled oars, though her
heart was in her mouth, she did not waken them. She stood over them to
let them have their sleep out. Was it not brave of Wendy?

It was well for those boys then that there was one among them who could
sniff danger even in his sleep. Peter sprang erect, as wide awake at
once as a dog, and with one warning cry he roused the others.

He stood motionless, one hand to his ear.

“Pirates!” he cried. The others came closer to him. A strange smile was
playing about his face, and Wendy saw it and shuddered. While that smile
was on his face no one dared address him; all they could do was to stand
ready to obey. The order came sharp and incisive.

“Dive!”

There was a gleam of legs, and instantly the lagoon seemed deserted.
Marooners' Rock stood alone in the forbidding waters as if it were
itself marooned.

The boat drew nearer. It was the pirate dinghy, with three figures in
her, Smee and Starkey, and the third a captive, no other than Tiger
Lily. Her hands and ankles were tied, and she knew what was to be her
fate. She was to be left on the rock to perish, an end to one of her
race more terrible than death by fire or torture, for is it not written
in the book of the tribe that there is no path through water to the
happy hunting-ground? Yet her face was impassive; she was the daughter
of a chief, she must die as a chief's daughter, it is enough.

They had caught her boarding the pirate ship with a knife in her mouth.
No watch was kept on the ship, it being Hook's boast that the wind of
his name guarded the ship for a mile around. Now her fate would help to
guard it also. One more wail would go the round in that wind by night.

In the gloom that they brought with them the two pirates did not see the
rock till they crashed into it.

“Luff, you lubber,” cried an Irish voice that was Smee's; “here's the
rock. Now, then, what we have to do is to hoist the redskin on to it and
leave her here to drown.”

It was the work of one brutal moment to land the beautiful girl on the
rock; she was too proud to offer a vain resistance.

Quite near the rock, but out of sight, two heads were bobbing up and
down, Peter's and Wendy's. Wendy was crying, for it was the first
tragedy she had seen. Peter had seen many tragedies, but he had
forgotten them all. He was less sorry than Wendy for Tiger Lily: it was
two against one that angered him, and he meant to save her. An easy way
would have been to wait until the pirates had gone, but he was never one
to choose the easy way.

There was almost nothing he could not do, and he now imitated the voice
of Hook.

“Ahoy there, you lubbers!” he called. It was a marvellous imitation.

“The captain!” said the pirates, staring at each other in surprise.

“He must be swimming out to us,” Starkey said, when they had looked for
him in vain.

“We are putting the redskin on the rock,” Smee called out.

“Set her free,” came the astonishing answer.

“Free!”

“Yes, cut her bonds and let her go.”

“But, captain--”

“At once, d'ye hear,” cried Peter, “or I'll plunge my hook in you.”

“This is queer!” Smee gasped.

“Better do what the captain orders,” said Starkey nervously.

“Ay, ay,” Smee said, and he cut Tiger Lily's cords. At once like an eel
she slid between Starkey's legs into the water.

Of course Wendy was very elated over Peter's cleverness; but she knew
that he would be elated also and very likely crow and thus betray
himself, so at once her hand went out to cover his mouth. But it was
stayed even in the act, for “Boat ahoy!” rang over the lagoon in Hook's
voice, and this time it was not Peter who had spoken.

Peter may have been about to crow, but his face puckered in a whistle of
surprise instead.

“Boat ahoy!” again came the voice.

Now Wendy understood. The real Hook was also in the water.

He was swimming to the boat, and as his men showed a light to guide him
he had soon reached them. In the light of the lantern Wendy saw his hook
grip the boat's side; she saw his evil swarthy face as he rose dripping
from the water, and, quaking, she would have liked to swim away, but
Peter would not budge. He was tingling with life and also top-heavy with
conceit. “Am I not a wonder, oh, I am a wonder!” he whispered to her,
and though she thought so also, she was really glad for the sake of his
reputation that no one heard him except herself.

He signed to her to listen.

The two pirates were very curious to know what had brought their captain
to them, but he sat with his head on his hook in a position of profound
melancholy.

“Captain, is all well?” they asked timidly, but he answered with a
hollow moan.

“He sighs,” said Smee.

“He sighs again,” said Starkey.

“And yet a third time he sighs,” said Smee.

Then at last he spoke passionately.

“The game's up,” he cried, “those boys have found a mother.”

Affrighted though she was, Wendy swelled with pride.

“O evil day!” cried Starkey.

“What's a mother?” asked the ignorant Smee.

Wendy was so shocked that she exclaimed. “He doesn't know!” and always
after this she felt that if you could have a pet pirate Smee would be
her one.

Peter pulled her beneath the water, for Hook had started up, crying,
“What was that?”

“I heard nothing,” said Starkey, raising the lantern over the waters,
and as the pirates looked they saw a strange sight. It was the nest I
have told you of, floating on the lagoon, and the Never bird was sitting
on it.

“See,” said Hook in answer to Smee's question, “that is a mother. What
a lesson! The nest must have fallen into the water, but would the mother
desert her eggs? No.”

There was a break in his voice, as if for a moment he recalled innocent
days when--but he brushed away this weakness with his hook.

Smee, much impressed, gazed at the bird as the nest was borne past, but
the more suspicious Starkey said, “If she is a mother, perhaps she is
hanging about here to help Peter.”

Hook winced. “Ay,” he said, “that is the fear that haunts me.”

He was roused from this dejection by Smee's eager voice.

“Captain,” said Smee, “could we not kidnap these boys' mother and make
her our mother?”

“It is a princely scheme,” cried Hook, and at once it took practical
shape in his great brain. “We will seize the children and carry them to
the boat: the boys we will make walk the plank, and Wendy shall be our
mother.”

Again Wendy forgot herself.

“Never!” she cried, and bobbed.

“What was that?”

But they could see nothing. They thought it must have been a leaf in the
wind. “Do you agree, my bullies?” asked Hook.

“There is my hand on it,” they both said.

“And there is my hook. Swear.”

They all swore. By this time they were on the rock, and suddenly Hook
remembered Tiger Lily.

“Where is the redskin?” he demanded abruptly.

He had a playful humour at moments, and they thought this was one of the
moments.

“That is all right, captain,” Smee answered complacently; “we let her
go.”

“Let her go!” cried Hook.

“'Twas your own orders,” the bo'sun faltered.

“You called over the water to us to let her go,” said Starkey.

“Brimstone and gall,” thundered Hook, “what cozening [cheating] is
going on here!” His face had gone black with rage, but he saw that they
believed their words, and he was startled. “Lads,” he said, shaking a
little, “I gave no such order.”

“It is passing queer,” Smee said, and they all fidgeted uncomfortably.
Hook raised his voice, but there was a quiver in it.

“Spirit that haunts this dark lagoon to-night,” he cried, “dost hear
me?”

Of course Peter should have kept quiet, but of course he did not. He
immediately answered in Hook's voice:

“Odds, bobs, hammer and tongs, I hear you.”

In that supreme moment Hook did not blanch, even at the gills, but Smee
and Starkey clung to each other in terror.

“Who are you, stranger? Speak!” Hook demanded.

“I am James Hook,” replied the voice, “captain of the JOLLY ROGER.”

“You are not; you are not,” Hook cried hoarsely.

“Brimstone and gall,” the voice retorted, “say that again, and I'll cast
anchor in you.”

Hook tried a more ingratiating manner. “If you are Hook,” he said almost
humbly, “come tell me, who am I?”

“A codfish,” replied the voice, “only a codfish.”

“A codfish!” Hook echoed blankly, and it was then, but not till then,
that his proud spirit broke. He saw his men draw back from him.

“Have we been captained all this time by a codfish!” they muttered. “It
is lowering to our pride.”

They were his dogs snapping at him, but, tragic figure though he had
become, he scarcely heeded them. Against such fearful evidence it was
not their belief in him that he needed, it was his own. He felt his ego
slipping from him. “Don't desert me, bully,” he whispered hoarsely to
it.

In his dark nature there was a touch of the feminine, as in all the
great pirates, and it sometimes gave him intuitions. Suddenly he tried
the guessing game.

“Hook,” he called, “have you another voice?”

Now Peter could never resist a game, and he answered blithely in his own
voice, “I have.”

“And another name?”

“Ay, ay.”

“Vegetable?” asked Hook.

“No.”

“Mineral?”

“No.”

“Animal?”

“Yes.”

“Man?”

“No!” This answer rang out scornfully.

“Boy?”

“Yes.”

“Ordinary boy?”

“No!”

“Wonderful boy?”

To Wendy's pain the answer that rang out this time was “Yes.”

“Are you in England?”

“No.”

“Are you here?”

“Yes.”

Hook was completely puzzled. “You ask him some questions,” he said to
the others, wiping his damp brow.

Smee reflected. “I can't think of a thing,” he said regretfully.

“Can't guess, can't guess!” crowed Peter. “Do you give it up?”

Of course in his pride he was carrying the game too far, and the
miscreants [villains] saw their chance.

“Yes, yes,” they answered eagerly.

“Well, then,” he cried, “I am Peter Pan.”

Pan!

In a moment Hook was himself again, and Smee and Starkey were his
faithful henchmen.

“Now we have him,” Hook shouted. “Into the water, Smee. Starkey, mind
the boat. Take him dead or alive!”

He leaped as he spoke, and simultaneously came the gay voice of Peter.

“Are you ready, boys?”

“Ay, ay,” from various parts of the lagoon.

“Then lam into the pirates.”

The fight was short and sharp. First to draw blood was John, who
gallantly climbed into the boat and held Starkey. There was fierce
struggle, in which the cutlass was torn from the pirate's grasp. He
wriggled overboard and John leapt after him. The dinghy drifted away.

Here and there a head bobbed up in the water, and there was a flash
of steel followed by a cry or a whoop. In the confusion some struck at
their own side. The corkscrew of Smee got Tootles in the fourth rib, but
he was himself pinked [nicked] in turn by Curly. Farther from the rock
Starkey was pressing Slightly and the twins hard.

Where all this time was Peter? He was seeking bigger game.

The others were all brave boys, and they must not be blamed for backing
from the pirate captain. His iron claw made a circle of dead water round
him, from which they fled like affrighted fishes.

But there was one who did not fear him: there was one prepared to enter
that circle.

Strangely, it was not in the water that they met. Hook rose to the rock
to breathe, and at the same moment Peter scaled it on the opposite
side. The rock was slippery as a ball, and they had to crawl rather than
climb. Neither knew that the other was coming. Each feeling for a grip
met the other's arm: in surprise they raised their heads; their faces
were almost touching; so they met.

Some of the greatest heroes have confessed that just before they fell to
[began combat] they had a sinking [feeling in the stomach]. Had it been
so with Peter at that moment I would admit it. After all, he was the
only man that the Sea-Cook had feared. But Peter had no sinking, he had
one feeling only, gladness; and he gnashed his pretty teeth with joy.
Quick as thought he snatched a knife from Hook's belt and was about to
drive it home, when he saw that he was higher up the rock than his foe.
It would not have been fighting fair. He gave the pirate a hand to help
him up.

It was then that Hook bit him.

Not the pain of this but its unfairness was what dazed Peter. It made
him quite helpless. He could only stare, horrified. Every child is
affected thus the first time he is treated unfairly. All he thinks he
has a right to when he comes to you to be yours is fairness. After
you have been unfair to him he will love you again, but will never
afterwards be quite the same boy. No one ever gets over the first
unfairness; no one except Peter. He often met it, but he always forgot
it. I suppose that was the real difference between him and all the rest.

So when he met it now it was like the first time; and he could just
stare, helpless. Twice the iron hand clawed him.

A few moments afterwards the other boys saw Hook in the water striking
wildly for the ship; no elation on the pestilent face now, only white
fear, for the crocodile was in dogged pursuit of him. On ordinary
occasions the boys would have swum alongside cheering; but now they were
uneasy, for they had lost both Peter and Wendy, and were scouring the
lagoon for them, calling them by name. They found the dinghy and went
home in it, shouting “Peter, Wendy” as they went, but no answer came
save mocking laughter from the mermaids. “They must be swimming back or
flying,” the boys concluded. They were not very anxious, because they
had such faith in Peter. They chuckled, boylike, because they would be
late for bed; and it was all mother Wendy's fault!

When their voices died away there came cold silence over the lagoon, and
then a feeble cry.

“Help, help!”

Two small figures were beating against the rock; the girl had fainted
and lay on the boy's arm. With a last effort Peter pulled her up the
rock and then lay down beside her. Even as he also fainted he saw that
the water was rising. He knew that they would soon be drowned, but he
could do no more.

As they lay side by side a mermaid caught Wendy by the feet, and began
pulling her softly into the water. Peter, feeling her slip from him,
woke with a start, and was just in time to draw her back. But he had to
tell her the truth.

“We are on the rock, Wendy,” he said, “but it is growing smaller. Soon
the water will be over it.”

She did not understand even now.

“We must go,” she said, almost brightly.

“Yes,” he answered faintly.

“Shall we swim or fly, Peter?”

He had to tell her.

“Do you think you could swim or fly as far as the island, Wendy, without
my help?”

She had to admit that she was too tired.

He moaned.

“What is it?” she asked, anxious about him at once.

“I can't help you, Wendy. Hook wounded me. I can neither fly nor swim.”

“Do you mean we shall both be drowned?”

“Look how the water is rising.”

They put their hands over their eyes to shut out the sight. They thought
they would soon be no more. As they sat thus something brushed against
Peter as light as a kiss, and stayed there, as if saying timidly, “Can I
be of any use?”

It was the tail of a kite, which Michael had made some days before. It
had torn itself out of his hand and floated away.

“Michael's kite,” Peter said without interest, but next moment he had
seized the tail, and was pulling the kite toward him.

“It lifted Michael off the ground,” he cried; “why should it not carry
you?”

“Both of us!”

“It can't lift two; Michael and Curly tried.”

“Let us draw lots,” Wendy said bravely.

“And you a lady; never.” Already he had tied the tail round her. She
clung to him; she refused to go without him; but with a “Good-bye,
Wendy,” he pushed her from the rock; and in a few minutes she was borne
out of his sight. Peter was alone on the lagoon.

The rock was very small now; soon it would be submerged. Pale rays of
light tiptoed across the waters; and by and by there was to be heard a
sound at once the most musical and the most melancholy in the world: the
mermaids calling to the moon.

Peter was not quite like other boys; but he was afraid at last. A
tremour ran through him, like a shudder passing over the sea; but on
the sea one shudder follows another till there are hundreds of them, and
Peter felt just the one. Next moment he was standing erect on the rock
again, with that smile on his face and a drum beating within him. It was
saying, “To die will be an awfully big adventure.”




Chapter 9 THE NEVER BIRD

The last sound Peter heard before he was quite alone were the mermaids
retiring one by one to their bedchambers under the sea. He was too far
away to hear their doors shut; but every door in the coral caves where
they live rings a tiny bell when it opens or closes (as in all the
nicest houses on the mainland), and he heard the bells.

Steadily the waters rose till they were nibbling at his feet; and to
pass the time until they made their final gulp, he watched the only
thing on the lagoon. He thought it was a piece of floating paper,
perhaps part of the kite, and wondered idly how long it would take to
drift ashore.

Presently he noticed as an odd thing that it was undoubtedly out upon
the lagoon with some definite purpose, for it was fighting the tide,
and sometimes winning; and when it won, Peter, always sympathetic to
the weaker side, could not help clapping; it was such a gallant piece of
paper.

It was not really a piece of paper; it was the Never bird, making
desperate efforts to reach Peter on the nest. By working her wings, in a
way she had learned since the nest fell into the water, she was able to
some extent to guide her strange craft, but by the time Peter recognised
her she was very exhausted. She had come to save him, to give him her
nest, though there were eggs in it. I rather wonder at the bird, for
though he had been nice to her, he had also sometimes tormented her. I
can suppose only that, like Mrs. Darling and the rest of them, she was
melted because he had all his first teeth.

She called out to him what she had come for, and he called out to her
what she was doing there; but of course neither of them understood
the other's language. In fanciful stories people can talk to the birds
freely, and I wish for the moment I could pretend that this were such a
story, and say that Peter replied intelligently to the Never bird; but
truth is best, and I want to tell you only what really happened. Well,
not only could they not understand each other, but they forgot their
manners.

“I--want--you--to--get--into--the--nest,” the bird called, speaking as
slowly and distinctly as possible, “and--then--you--can--drift--ashore,
but--I--am--too--tired--to--bring--it--any--nearer--so--you--must--try
to--swim--to--it.”

“What are you quacking about?” Peter answered. “Why don't you let the
nest drift as usual?”

“I--want--you--” the bird said, and repeated it all over.

Then Peter tried slow and distinct.

“What--are--you--quacking--about?” and so on.

The Never bird became irritated; they have very short tempers.

“You dunderheaded little jay!” she screamed, “Why don't you do as I tell
you?”

Peter felt that she was calling him names, and at a venture he retorted
hotly:

“So are you!”

Then rather curiously they both snapped out the same remark:

“Shut up!”

“Shut up!”

Nevertheless the bird was determined to save him if she could, and by
one last mighty effort she propelled the nest against the rock. Then up
she flew; deserting her eggs, so as to make her meaning clear.

Then at last he understood, and clutched the nest and waved his thanks
to the bird as she fluttered overhead. It was not to receive his thanks,
however, that she hung there in the sky; it was not even to watch him
get into the nest; it was to see what he did with her eggs.

There were two large white eggs, and Peter lifted them up and reflected.
The bird covered her face with her wings, so as not to see the last of
them; but she could not help peeping between the feathers.

I forget whether I have told you that there was a stave on the rock,
driven into it by some buccaneers of long ago to mark the site of buried
treasure. The children had discovered the glittering hoard, and when in
a mischievous mood used to fling showers of moidores, diamonds, pearls
and pieces of eight to the gulls, who pounced upon them for food, and
then flew away, raging at the scurvy trick that had been played upon
them. The stave was still there, and on it Starkey had hung his hat, a
deep tarpaulin, watertight, with a broad brim. Peter put the eggs into
this hat and set it on the lagoon. It floated beautifully.

The Never bird saw at once what he was up to, and screamed her
admiration of him; and, alas, Peter crowed his agreement with her. Then
he got into the nest, reared the stave in it as a mast, and hung up his
shirt for a sail. At the same moment the bird fluttered down upon the
hat and once more sat snugly on her eggs. She drifted in one direction,
and he was borne off in another, both cheering.

Of course when Peter landed he beached his barque [small ship, actually
the Never Bird's nest in this particular case in point] in a place where
the bird would easily find it; but the hat was such a great success that
she abandoned the nest. It drifted about till it went to pieces, and
often Starkey came to the shore of the lagoon, and with many bitter
feelings watched the bird sitting on his hat. As we shall not see her
again, it may be worth mentioning here that all Never birds now build
in that shape of nest, with a broad brim on which the youngsters take an
airing.

Great were the rejoicings when Peter reached the home under the ground
almost as soon as Wendy, who had been carried hither and thither by
the kite. Every boy had adventures to tell; but perhaps the biggest
adventure of all was that they were several hours late for bed. This so
inflated them that they did various dodgy things to get staying up still
longer, such as demanding bandages; but Wendy, though glorying in having
them all home again safe and sound, was scandalised by the lateness of
the hour, and cried, “To bed, to bed,” in a voice that had to be obeyed.
Next day, however, she was awfully tender, and gave out bandages to
every one, and they played till bed-time at limping about and carrying
their arms in slings.




Chapter 10 THE HAPPY HOME

One important result of the brush [with the pirates] on the lagoon was
that it made the redskins their friends. Peter had saved Tiger Lily from
a dreadful fate, and now there was nothing she and her braves would not
do for him. All night they sat above, keeping watch over the home under
the ground and awaiting the big attack by the pirates which obviously
could not be much longer delayed. Even by day they hung about, smoking
the pipe of peace, and looking almost as if they wanted tit-bits to eat.

They called Peter the Great White Father, prostrating themselves [lying
down] before him; and he liked this tremendously, so that it was not
really good for him.

“The great white father,” he would say to them in a very lordly manner,
as they grovelled at his feet, “is glad to see the Piccaninny warriors
protecting his wigwam from the pirates.”

“Me Tiger Lily,” that lovely creature would reply. “Peter Pan save me,
me his velly nice friend. Me no let pirates hurt him.”

She was far too pretty to cringe in this way, but Peter thought it his
due, and he would answer condescendingly, “It is good. Peter Pan has
spoken.”

Always when he said, “Peter Pan has spoken,” it meant that they must now
shut up, and they accepted it humbly in that spirit; but they were by
no means so respectful to the other boys, whom they looked upon as just
ordinary braves. They said “How-do?” to them, and things like that; and
what annoyed the boys was that Peter seemed to think this all right.

Secretly Wendy sympathised with them a little, but she was far too loyal
a housewife to listen to any complaints against father. “Father knows
best,” she always said, whatever her private opinion must be. Her
private opinion was that the redskins should not call her a squaw.

We have now reached the evening that was to be known among them as the
Night of Nights, because of its adventures and their upshot. The day, as
if quietly gathering its forces, had been almost uneventful, and now the
redskins in their blankets were at their posts above, while, below, the
children were having their evening meal; all except Peter, who had gone
out to get the time. The way you got the time on the island was to find
the crocodile, and then stay near him till the clock struck.

The meal happened to be a make-believe tea, and they sat around the
board, guzzling in their greed; and really, what with their chatter and
recriminations, the noise, as Wendy said, was positively deafening.
To be sure, she did not mind noise, but she simply would not have them
grabbing things, and then excusing themselves by saying that Tootles had
pushed their elbow. There was a fixed rule that they must never hit back
at meals, but should refer the matter of dispute to Wendy by raising
the right arm politely and saying, “I complain of so-and-so;” but what
usually happened was that they forgot to do this or did it too much.

“Silence,” cried Wendy when for the twentieth time she had told them
that they were not all to speak at once. “Is your mug empty, Slightly
darling?”

“Not quite empty, mummy,” Slightly said, after looking into an imaginary
mug.

“He hasn't even begun to drink his milk,” Nibs interposed.

This was telling, and Slightly seized his chance.

“I complain of Nibs,” he cried promptly.

John, however, had held up his hand first.

“Well, John?”

“May I sit in Peter's chair, as he is not here?”

“Sit in father's chair, John!” Wendy was scandalised. “Certainly not.”

“He is not really our father,” John answered. “He didn't even know how a
father does till I showed him.”

This was grumbling. “We complain of John,” cried the twins.

Tootles held up his hand. He was so much the humblest of them, indeed he
was the only humble one, that Wendy was specially gentle with him.

“I don't suppose,” Tootles said diffidently [bashfully or timidly],
“that I could be father.”

“No, Tootles.”

Once Tootles began, which was not very often, he had a silly way of
going on.

“As I can't be father,” he said heavily, “I don't suppose, Michael, you
would let me be baby?”

“No, I won't,” Michael rapped out. He was already in his basket.

“As I can't be baby,” Tootles said, getting heavier and heavier and
heavier, “do you think I could be a twin?”

“No, indeed,” replied the twins; “it's awfully difficult to be a twin.”

“As I can't be anything important,” said Tootles, “would any of you like
to see me do a trick?”

“No,” they all replied.

Then at last he stopped. “I hadn't really any hope,” he said.

The hateful telling broke out again.

“Slightly is coughing on the table.”

“The twins began with cheese-cakes.”

“Curly is taking both butter and honey.”

“Nibs is speaking with his mouth full.”

“I complain of the twins.”

“I complain of Curly.”

“I complain of Nibs.”

“Oh dear, oh dear,” cried Wendy, “I'm sure I sometimes think that
spinsters are to be envied.”

She told them to clear away, and sat down to her work-basket, a heavy
load of stockings and every knee with a hole in it as usual.

“Wendy,” remonstrated [scolded] Michael, “I'm too big for a cradle.”

“I must have somebody in a cradle,” she said almost tartly, “and you
are the littlest. A cradle is such a nice homely thing to have about a
house.”

While she sewed they played around her; such a group of happy faces
and dancing limbs lit up by that romantic fire. It had become a very
familiar scene, this, in the home under the ground, but we are looking
on it for the last time.

There was a step above, and Wendy, you may be sure, was the first to
recognize it.

“Children, I hear your father's step. He likes you to meet him at the
door.”

Above, the redskins crouched before Peter.

“Watch well, braves. I have spoken.”

And then, as so often before, the gay children dragged him from his
tree. As so often before, but never again.

He had brought nuts for the boys as well as the correct time for Wendy.

“Peter, you just spoil them, you know,” Wendy simpered [exaggerated a
smile].

“Ah, old lady,” said Peter, hanging up his gun.

“It was me told him mothers are called old lady,” Michael whispered to
Curly.

“I complain of Michael,” said Curly instantly.

The first twin came to Peter. “Father, we want to dance.”

“Dance away, my little man,” said Peter, who was in high good humour.

“But we want you to dance.”

Peter was really the best dancer among them, but he pretended to be
scandalised.

“Me! My old bones would rattle!”

“And mummy too.”

“What,” cried Wendy, “the mother of such an armful, dance!”

“But on a Saturday night,” Slightly insinuated.

It was not really Saturday night, at least it may have been, for
they had long lost count of the days; but always if they wanted to do
anything special they said this was Saturday night, and then they did
it.

“Of course it is Saturday night, Peter,” Wendy said, relenting.

“People of our figure, Wendy!”

“But it is only among our own progeny [children].”

“True, true.”

So they were told they could dance, but they must put on their nighties
first.

“Ah, old lady,” Peter said aside to Wendy, warming himself by the fire
and looking down at her as she sat turning a heel, “there is nothing
more pleasant of an evening for you and me when the day's toil is over
than to rest by the fire with the little ones near by.”

“It is sweet, Peter, isn't it?” Wendy said, frightfully gratified.
“Peter, I think Curly has your nose.”

“Michael takes after you.”

She went to him and put her hand on his shoulder.

“Dear Peter,” she said, “with such a large family, of course, I have now
passed my best, but you don't want to [ex]change me, do you?”

“No, Wendy.”

Certainly he did not want a change, but he looked at her uncomfortably,
blinking, you know, like one not sure whether he was awake or asleep.

“Peter, what is it?”

“I was just thinking,” he said, a little scared. “It is only
make-believe, isn't it, that I am their father?”

“Oh yes,” Wendy said primly [formally and properly].

“You see,” he continued apologetically, “it would make me seem so old to
be their real father.”

“But they are ours, Peter, yours and mine.”

“But not really, Wendy?” he asked anxiously.

“Not if you don't wish it,” she replied; and she distinctly heard his
sigh of relief. “Peter,” she asked, trying to speak firmly, “what are
your exact feelings to [about] me?”

“Those of a devoted son, Wendy.”

“I thought so,” she said, and went and sat by herself at the extreme end
of the room.

“You are so queer,” he said, frankly puzzled, “and Tiger Lily is just
the same. There is something she wants to be to me, but she says it is
not my mother.”

“No, indeed, it is not,” Wendy replied with frightful emphasis. Now we
know why she was prejudiced against the redskins.

“Then what is it?”

“It isn't for a lady to tell.”

“Oh, very well,” Peter said, a little nettled. “Perhaps Tinker Bell will
tell me.”

“Oh yes, Tinker Bell will tell you,” Wendy retorted scornfully. “She is
an abandoned little creature.”

Here Tink, who was in her bedroom, eavesdropping, squeaked out something
impudent.

“She says she glories in being abandoned,” Peter interpreted.

He had a sudden idea. “Perhaps Tink wants to be my mother?”

“You silly ass!” cried Tinker Bell in a passion.

She had said it so often that Wendy needed no translation.

“I almost agree with her,” Wendy snapped. Fancy Wendy snapping! But she
had been much tried, and she little knew what was to happen before the
night was out. If she had known she would not have snapped.

None of them knew. Perhaps it was best not to know. Their ignorance
gave them one more glad hour; and as it was to be their last hour on the
island, let us rejoice that there were sixty glad minutes in it. They
sang and danced in their night-gowns. Such a deliciously creepy song
it was, in which they pretended to be frightened at their own shadows,
little witting that so soon shadows would close in upon them, from whom
they would shrink in real fear. So uproariously gay was the dance, and
how they buffeted each other on the bed and out of it! It was a pillow
fight rather than a dance, and when it was finished, the pillows
insisted on one bout more, like partners who know that they may never
meet again. The stories they told, before it was time for Wendy's
good-night story! Even Slightly tried to tell a story that night, but
the beginning was so fearfully dull that it appalled not only the others
but himself, and he said gloomily:

“Yes, it is a dull beginning. I say, let us pretend that it is the end.”

And then at last they all got into bed for Wendy's story, the story they
loved best, the story Peter hated. Usually when she began to tell this
story he left the room or put his hands over his ears; and possibly if
he had done either of those things this time they might all still be on
the island. But to-night he remained on his stool; and we shall see what
happened.




Chapter 11 WENDY'S STORY

“Listen, then,” said Wendy, settling down to her story, with Michael at
her feet and seven boys in the bed. “There was once a gentleman--”

“I had rather he had been a lady,” Curly said.

“I wish he had been a white rat,” said Nibs.

“Quiet,” their mother admonished [cautioned] them. “There was a lady
also, and--”

“Oh, mummy,” cried the first twin, “you mean that there is a lady also,
don't you? She is not dead, is she?”

“Oh, no.”

“I am awfully glad she isn't dead,” said Tootles. “Are you glad, John?”

“Of course I am.”

“Are you glad, Nibs?”

“Rather.”

“Are you glad, Twins?”

“We are glad.”

“Oh dear,” sighed Wendy.

“Little less noise there,” Peter called out, determined that she should
have fair play, however beastly a story it might be in his opinion.

“The gentleman's name,” Wendy continued, “was Mr. Darling, and her name
was Mrs. Darling.”

“I knew them,” John said, to annoy the others.

“I think I knew them,” said Michael rather doubtfully.

“They were married, you know,” explained Wendy, “and what do you think
they had?”

“White rats,” cried Nibs, inspired.

“No.”

“It's awfully puzzling,” said Tootles, who knew the story by heart.

“Quiet, Tootles. They had three descendants.”

“What is descendants?”

“Well, you are one, Twin.”

“Did you hear that, John? I am a descendant.”

“Descendants are only children,” said John.

“Oh dear, oh dear,” sighed Wendy. “Now these three children had a
faithful nurse called Nana; but Mr. Darling was angry with her and
chained her up in the yard, and so all the children flew away.”

“It's an awfully good story,” said Nibs.

“They flew away,” Wendy continued, “to the Neverland, where the lost
children are.”

“I just thought they did,” Curly broke in excitedly. “I don't know how
it is, but I just thought they did!”

“O Wendy,” cried Tootles, “was one of the lost children called Tootles?”

“Yes, he was.”

“I am in a story. Hurrah, I am in a story, Nibs.”

“Hush. Now I want you to consider the feelings of the unhappy parents
with all their children flown away.”

“Oo!” they all moaned, though they were not really considering the
feelings of the unhappy parents one jot.

“Think of the empty beds!”

“Oo!”

“It's awfully sad,” the first twin said cheerfully.

“I don't see how it can have a happy ending,” said the second twin. “Do
you, Nibs?”

“I'm frightfully anxious.”

“If you knew how great is a mother's love,” Wendy told them
triumphantly, “you would have no fear.” She had now come to the part
that Peter hated.

“I do like a mother's love,” said Tootles, hitting Nibs with a pillow.
“Do you like a mother's love, Nibs?”

“I do just,” said Nibs, hitting back.

“You see,” Wendy said complacently, “our heroine knew that the mother
would always leave the window open for her children to fly back by; so
they stayed away for years and had a lovely time.”

“Did they ever go back?”

“Let us now,” said Wendy, bracing herself up for her finest effort,
“take a peep into the future;” and they all gave themselves the twist
that makes peeps into the future easier. “Years have rolled by, and who
is this elegant lady of uncertain age alighting at London Station?”

“O Wendy, who is she?” cried Nibs, every bit as excited as if he didn't
know.

“Can it be--yes--no--it is--the fair Wendy!”

“Oh!”

“And who are the two noble portly figures accompanying her, now grown to
man's estate? Can they be John and Michael? They are!”

“Oh!”

“'See, dear brothers,' says Wendy pointing upwards, 'there is the window
still standing open. Ah, now we are rewarded for our sublime faith in a
mother's love.' So up they flew to their mummy and daddy, and pen cannot
describe the happy scene, over which we draw a veil.”

That was the story, and they were as pleased with it as the fair
narrator herself. Everything just as it should be, you see. Off we skip
like the most heartless things in the world, which is what children are,
but so attractive; and we have an entirely selfish time, and then when
we have need of special attention we nobly return for it, confident that
we shall be rewarded instead of smacked.

So great indeed was their faith in a mother's love that they felt they
could afford to be callous for a bit longer.

But there was one there who knew better, and when Wendy finished he
uttered a hollow groan.

“What is it, Peter?” she cried, running to him, thinking he was ill. She
felt him solicitously, lower down than his chest. “Where is it, Peter?”

“It isn't that kind of pain,” Peter replied darkly.

“Then what kind is it?”

“Wendy, you are wrong about mothers.”

They all gathered round him in affright, so alarming was his agitation;
and with a fine candour he told them what he had hitherto concealed.

“Long ago,” he said, “I thought like you that my mother would always
keep the window open for me, so I stayed away for moons and moons and
moons, and then flew back; but the window was barred, for mother had
forgotten all about me, and there was another little boy sleeping in my
bed.”

I am not sure that this was true, but Peter thought it was true; and it
scared them.

“Are you sure mothers are like that?”

“Yes.”

So this was the truth about mothers. The toads!

Still it is best to be careful; and no one knows so quickly as a child
when he should give in. “Wendy, let us [let's] go home,” cried John and
Michael together.

“Yes,” she said, clutching them.

“Not to-night?” asked the lost boys bewildered. They knew in what they
called their hearts that one can get on quite well without a mother, and
that it is only the mothers who think you can't.

“At once,” Wendy replied resolutely, for the horrible thought had come
to her: “Perhaps mother is in half mourning by this time.”

This dread made her forgetful of what must be Peter's feelings, and
she said to him rather sharply, “Peter, will you make the necessary
arrangements?”

“If you wish it,” he replied, as coolly as if she had asked him to pass
the nuts.

Not so much as a sorry-to-lose-you between them! If she did not mind the
parting, he was going to show her, was Peter, that neither did he.

But of course he cared very much; and he was so full of wrath against
grown-ups, who, as usual, were spoiling everything, that as soon as he
got inside his tree he breathed intentionally quick short breaths at the
rate of about five to a second. He did this because there is a saying in
the Neverland that, every time you breathe, a grown-up dies; and Peter
was killing them off vindictively as fast as possible.

Then having given the necessary instructions to the redskins he returned
to the home, where an unworthy scene had been enacted in his absence.
Panic-stricken at the thought of losing Wendy the lost boys had advanced
upon her threateningly.

“It will be worse than before she came,” they cried.

“We shan't let her go.”

“Let's keep her prisoner.”

“Ay, chain her up.”

In her extremity an instinct told her to which of them to turn.

“Tootles,” she cried, “I appeal to you.”

Was it not strange? She appealed to Tootles, quite the silliest one.

Grandly, however, did Tootles respond. For that one moment he dropped
his silliness and spoke with dignity.

“I am just Tootles,” he said, “and nobody minds me. But the first who
does not behave to Wendy like an English gentleman I will blood him
severely.”

He drew back his hanger; and for that instant his sun was at noon. The
others held back uneasily. Then Peter returned, and they saw at once
that they would get no support from him. He would keep no girl in the
Neverland against her will.

“Wendy,” he said, striding up and down, “I have asked the redskins to
guide you through the wood, as flying tires you so.”

“Thank you, Peter.”

“Then,” he continued, in the short sharp voice of one accustomed to be
obeyed, “Tinker Bell will take you across the sea. Wake her, Nibs.”

Nibs had to knock twice before he got an answer, though Tink had really
been sitting up in bed listening for some time.

“Who are you? How dare you? Go away,” she cried.

“You are to get up, Tink,” Nibs called, “and take Wendy on a journey.”

Of course Tink had been delighted to hear that Wendy was going; but
she was jolly well determined not to be her courier, and she said so in
still more offensive language. Then she pretended to be asleep again.

“She says she won't!” Nibs exclaimed, aghast at such insubordination,
whereupon Peter went sternly toward the young lady's chamber.

“Tink,” he rapped out, “if you don't get up and dress at once I will
open the curtains, and then we shall all see you in your negligee
[nightgown].”

This made her leap to the floor. “Who said I wasn't getting up?” she
cried.

In the meantime the boys were gazing very forlornly at Wendy, now
equipped with John and Michael for the journey. By this time they were
dejected, not merely because they were about to lose her, but also
because they felt that she was going off to something nice to which they
had not been invited. Novelty was beckoning to them as usual.

Crediting them with a nobler feeling Wendy melted.

“Dear ones,” she said, “if you will all come with me I feel almost sure
I can get my father and mother to adopt you.”

The invitation was meant specially for Peter, but each of the boys was
thinking exclusively of himself, and at once they jumped with joy.

“But won't they think us rather a handful?” Nibs asked in the middle of
his jump.

“Oh no,” said Wendy, rapidly thinking it out, “it will only mean having
a few beds in the drawing-room; they can be hidden behind the screens on
first Thursdays.”

“Peter, can we go?” they all cried imploringly. They took it for granted
that if they went he would go also, but really they scarcely cared. Thus
children are ever ready, when novelty knocks, to desert their dearest
ones.

“All right,” Peter replied with a bitter smile, and immediately they
rushed to get their things.

“And now, Peter,” Wendy said, thinking she had put everything right,
“I am going to give you your medicine before you go.” She loved to give
them medicine, and undoubtedly gave them too much. Of course it was only
water, but it was out of a bottle, and she always shook the bottle and
counted the drops, which gave it a certain medicinal quality. On this
occasion, however, she did not give Peter his draught [portion], for
just as she had prepared it, she saw a look on his face that made her
heart sink.

“Get your things, Peter,” she cried, shaking.

“No,” he answered, pretending indifference, “I am not going with you,
Wendy.”

“Yes, Peter.”

“No.”

To show that her departure would leave him unmoved, he skipped up and
down the room, playing gaily on his heartless pipes. She had to run
about after him, though it was rather undignified.

“To find your mother,” she coaxed.

Now, if Peter had ever quite had a mother, he no longer missed her. He
could do very well without one. He had thought them out, and remembered
only their bad points.

“No, no,” he told Wendy decisively; “perhaps she would say I was old,
and I just want always to be a little boy and to have fun.”

“But, Peter--”

“No.”

And so the others had to be told.

“Peter isn't coming.”

Peter not coming! They gazed blankly at him, their sticks over their
backs, and on each stick a bundle. Their first thought was that if Peter
was not going he had probably changed his mind about letting them go.

But he was far too proud for that. “If you find your mothers,” he said
darkly, “I hope you will like them.”

The awful cynicism of this made an uncomfortable impression, and most
of them began to look rather doubtful. After all, their faces said, were
they not noodles to want to go?

“Now then,” cried Peter, “no fuss, no blubbering; good-bye, Wendy;” and
he held out his hand cheerily, quite as if they must really go now, for
he had something important to do.

She had to take his hand, and there was no indication that he would
prefer a thimble.

“You will remember about changing your flannels, Peter?” she said,
lingering over him. She was always so particular about their flannels.

“Yes.”

“And you will take your medicine?”

“Yes.”

That seemed to be everything, and an awkward pause followed. Peter,
however, was not the kind that breaks down before other people. “Are you
ready, Tinker Bell?” he called out.

“Ay, ay.”

“Then lead the way.”

Tink darted up the nearest tree; but no one followed her, for it was
at this moment that the pirates made their dreadful attack upon the
redskins. Above, where all had been so still, the air was rent with
shrieks and the clash of steel. Below, there was dead silence. Mouths
opened and remained open. Wendy fell on her knees, but her arms were
extended toward Peter. All arms were extended to him, as if suddenly
blown in his direction; they were beseeching him mutely not to desert
them. As for Peter, he seized his sword, the same he thought he had
slain Barbecue with, and the lust of battle was in his eye.




Chapter 12 THE CHILDREN ARE CARRIED OFF

The pirate attack had been a complete surprise: a sure proof that the
unscrupulous Hook had conducted it improperly, for to surprise redskins
fairly is beyond the wit of the white man.

By all the unwritten laws of savage warfare it is always the redskin who
attacks, and with the wiliness of his race he does it just before the
dawn, at which time he knows the courage of the whites to be at its
lowest ebb. The white men have in the meantime made a rude stockade on
the summit of yonder undulating ground, at the foot of which a stream
runs, for it is destruction to be too far from water. There they await
the onslaught, the inexperienced ones clutching their revolvers and
treading on twigs, but the old hands sleeping tranquilly until just
before the dawn. Through the long black night the savage scouts wriggle,
snake-like, among the grass without stirring a blade. The brushwood
closes behind them, as silently as sand into which a mole has dived.
Not a sound is to be heard, save when they give vent to a wonderful
imitation of the lonely call of the coyote. The cry is answered by other
braves; and some of them do it even better than the coyotes, who are not
very good at it. So the chill hours wear on, and the long suspense is
horribly trying to the paleface who has to live through it for the first
time; but to the trained hand those ghastly calls and still ghastlier
silences are but an intimation of how the night is marching.

That this was the usual procedure was so well known to Hook that in
disregarding it he cannot be excused on the plea of ignorance.

The Piccaninnies, on their part, trusted implicitly to his honour, and
their whole action of the night stands out in marked contrast to his.
They left nothing undone that was consistent with the reputation of
their tribe. With that alertness of the senses which is at once the
marvel and despair of civilised peoples, they knew that the pirates were
on the island from the moment one of them trod on a dry stick; and in
an incredibly short space of time the coyote cries began. Every foot of
ground between the spot where Hook had landed his forces and the
home under the trees was stealthily examined by braves wearing their
mocassins with the heels in front. They found only one hillock with a
stream at its base, so that Hook had no choice; here he must establish
himself and wait for just before the dawn. Everything being thus mapped
out with almost diabolical cunning, the main body of the redskins folded
their blankets around them, and in the phlegmatic manner that is to
them, the pearl of manhood squatted above the children's home, awaiting
the cold moment when they should deal pale death.

Here dreaming, though wide-awake, of the exquisite tortures to which
they were to put him at break of day, those confiding savages were found
by the treacherous Hook. From the accounts afterwards supplied by such
of the scouts as escaped the carnage, he does not seem even to have
paused at the rising ground, though it is certain that in that grey
light he must have seen it: no thought of waiting to be attacked appears
from first to last to have visited his subtle mind; he would not even
hold off till the night was nearly spent; on he pounded with no policy
but to fall to [get into combat]. What could the bewildered scouts do,
masters as they were of every war-like artifice save this one, but trot
helplessly after him, exposing themselves fatally to view, while they
gave pathetic utterance to the coyote cry.

Around the brave Tiger Lily were a dozen of her stoutest warriors, and
they suddenly saw the perfidious pirates bearing down upon them. Fell
from their eyes then the film through which they had looked at
victory. No more would they torture at the stake. For them the happy
hunting-grounds was now. They knew it; but as their father's sons they
acquitted themselves. Even then they had time to gather in a phalanx
[dense formation] that would have been hard to break had they risen
quickly, but this they were forbidden to do by the traditions of their
race. It is written that the noble savage must never express surprise in
the presence of the white. Thus terrible as the sudden appearance of the
pirates must have been to them, they remained stationary for a moment,
not a muscle moving; as if the foe had come by invitation. Then, indeed,
the tradition gallantly upheld, they seized their weapons, and the air
was torn with the war-cry; but it was now too late.

It is no part of ours to describe what was a massacre rather than a
fight. Thus perished many of the flower of the Piccaninny tribe. Not all
unavenged did they die, for with Lean Wolf fell Alf Mason, to disturb
the Spanish Main no more, and among others who bit the dust were Geo.
Scourie, Chas. Turley, and the Alsatian Foggerty. Turley fell to the
tomahawk of the terrible Panther, who ultimately cut a way through the
pirates with Tiger Lily and a small remnant of the tribe.

To what extent Hook is to blame for his tactics on this occasion is for
the historian to decide. Had he waited on the rising ground till the
proper hour he and his men would probably have been butchered; and in
judging him it is only fair to take this into account. What he should
perhaps have done was to acquaint his opponents that he proposed to
follow a new method. On the other hand, this, as destroying the element
of surprise, would have made his strategy of no avail, so that the whole
question is beset with difficulties. One cannot at least withhold a
reluctant admiration for the wit that had conceived so bold a scheme,
and the fell [deadly] genius with which it was carried out.

What were his own feelings about himself at that triumphant moment?
Fain [gladly] would his dogs have known, as breathing heavily and wiping
their cutlasses, they gathered at a discreet distance from his hook, and
squinted through their ferret eyes at this extraordinary man. Elation
must have been in his heart, but his face did not reflect it: ever a
dark and solitary enigma, he stood aloof from his followers in spirit as
in substance.

The night's work was not yet over, for it was not the redskins he had
come out to destroy; they were but the bees to be smoked, so that he
should get at the honey. It was Pan he wanted, Pan and Wendy and their
band, but chiefly Pan.

Peter was such a small boy that one tends to wonder at the man's hatred
of him. True he had flung Hook's arm to the crocodile, but even this
and the increased insecurity of life to which it led, owing to
the crocodile's pertinacity [persistance], hardly account for a
vindictiveness so relentless and malignant. The truth is that there was
a something about Peter which goaded the pirate captain to frenzy. It
was not his courage, it was not his engaging appearance, it was not--.
There is no beating about the bush, for we know quite well what it was,
and have got to tell. It was Peter's cockiness.

This had got on Hook's nerves; it made his iron claw twitch, and at
night it disturbed him like an insect. While Peter lived, the tortured
man felt that he was a lion in a cage into which a sparrow had come.

The question now was how to get down the trees, or how to get his dogs
down? He ran his greedy eyes over them, searching for the thinnest
ones. They wriggled uncomfortably, for they knew he would not scruple
[hesitate] to ram them down with poles.

In the meantime, what of the boys? We have seen them at the first clang
of the weapons, turned as it were into stone figures, open-mouthed,
all appealing with outstretched arms to Peter; and we return to them as
their mouths close, and their arms fall to their sides. The pandemonium
above has ceased almost as suddenly as it arose, passed like a fierce
gust of wind; but they know that in the passing it has determined their
fate.

Which side had won?

The pirates, listening avidly at the mouths of the trees, heard the
question put by every boy, and alas, they also heard Peter's answer.

“If the redskins have won,” he said, “they will beat the tom-tom; it is
always their sign of victory.”

Now Smee had found the tom-tom, and was at that moment sitting on it.
“You will never hear the tom-tom again,” he muttered, but inaudibly of
course, for strict silence had been enjoined [urged]. To his amazement
Hook signed him to beat the tom-tom, and slowly there came to Smee an
understanding of the dreadful wickedness of the order. Never, probably,
had this simple man admired Hook so much.

Twice Smee beat upon the instrument, and then stopped to listen
gleefully.

“The tom-tom,” the miscreants heard Peter cry; “an Indian victory!”

The doomed children answered with a cheer that was music to the black
hearts above, and almost immediately they repeated their good-byes
to Peter. This puzzled the pirates, but all their other feelings were
swallowed by a base delight that the enemy were about to come up the
trees. They smirked at each other and rubbed their hands. Rapidly and
silently Hook gave his orders: one man to each tree, and the others to
arrange themselves in a line two yards apart.




Chapter 13 DO YOU BELIEVE IN FAIRIES?

The more quickly this horror is disposed of the better. The first to
emerge from his tree was Curly. He rose out of it into the arms of
Cecco, who flung him to Smee, who flung him to Starkey, who flung him to
Bill Jukes, who flung him to Noodler, and so he was tossed from one to
another till he fell at the feet of the black pirate. All the boys were
plucked from their trees in this ruthless manner; and several of them
were in the air at a time, like bales of goods flung from hand to hand.

A different treatment was accorded to Wendy, who came last. With
ironical politeness Hook raised his hat to her, and, offering her his
arm, escorted her to the spot where the others were being gagged. He
did it with such an air, he was so frightfully DISTINGUE [imposingly
distinguished], that she was too fascinated to cry out. She was only a
little girl.

Perhaps it is tell-tale to divulge that for a moment Hook entranced her,
and we tell on her only because her slip led to strange results. Had she
haughtily unhanded him (and we should have loved to write it of her),
she would have been hurled through the air like the others, and then
Hook would probably not have been present at the tying of the children;
and had he not been at the tying he would not have discovered Slightly's
secret, and without the secret he could not presently have made his foul
attempt on Peter's life.

They were tied to prevent their flying away, doubled up with their knees
close to their ears; and for the trussing of them the black pirate had
cut a rope into nine equal pieces. All went well until Slightly's turn
came, when he was found to be like those irritating parcels that use up
all the string in going round and leave no tags [ends] with which to
tie a knot. The pirates kicked him in their rage, just as you kick the
parcel (though in fairness you should kick the string); and strange
to say it was Hook who told them to belay their violence. His lip was
curled with malicious triumph. While his dogs were merely sweating
because every time they tried to pack the unhappy lad tight in one
part he bulged out in another, Hook's master mind had gone far beneath
Slightly's surface, probing not for effects but for causes; and his
exultation showed that he had found them. Slightly, white to the gills,
knew that Hook had surprised [discovered] his secret, which was this,
that no boy so blown out could use a tree wherein an average man need
stick. Poor Slightly, most wretched of all the children now, for he
was in a panic about Peter, bitterly regretted what he had done. Madly
addicted to the drinking of water when he was hot, he had swelled in
consequence to his present girth, and instead of reducing himself to fit
his tree he had, unknown to the others, whittled his tree to make it fit
him.

Sufficient of this Hook guessed to persuade him that Peter at last lay
at his mercy, but no word of the dark design that now formed in the
subterranean caverns of his mind crossed his lips; he merely signed
that the captives were to be conveyed to the ship, and that he would be
alone.

How to convey them? Hunched up in their ropes they might indeed be
rolled down hill like barrels, but most of the way lay through a morass.
Again Hook's genius surmounted difficulties. He indicated that the
little house must be used as a conveyance. The children were flung into
it, four stout pirates raised it on their shoulders, the others fell in
behind, and singing the hateful pirate chorus the strange procession
set off through the wood. I don't know whether any of the children were
crying; if so, the singing drowned the sound; but as the little house
disappeared in the forest, a brave though tiny jet of smoke issued from
its chimney as if defying Hook.

Hook saw it, and it did Peter a bad service. It dried up any trickle of
pity for him that may have remained in the pirate's infuriated breast.

The first thing he did on finding himself alone in the fast falling
night was to tiptoe to Slightly's tree, and make sure that it provided
him with a passage. Then for long he remained brooding; his hat of ill
omen on the sward, so that any gentle breeze which had arisen might play
refreshingly through his hair. Dark as were his thoughts his blue eyes
were as soft as the periwinkle. Intently he listened for any sound from
the nether world, but all was as silent below as above; the house under
the ground seemed to be but one more empty tenement in the void. Was
that boy asleep, or did he stand waiting at the foot of Slightly's tree,
with his dagger in his hand?

There was no way of knowing, save by going down. Hook let his cloak slip
softly to the ground, and then biting his lips till a lewd blood stood
on them, he stepped into the tree. He was a brave man, but for a moment
he had to stop there and wipe his brow, which was dripping like a
candle. Then, silently, he let himself go into the unknown.

He arrived unmolested at the foot of the shaft, and stood still again,
biting at his breath, which had almost left him. As his eyes became
accustomed to the dim light various objects in the home under the trees
took shape; but the only one on which his greedy gaze rested, long
sought for and found at last, was the great bed. On the bed lay Peter
fast asleep.

Unaware of the tragedy being enacted above, Peter had continued, for
a little time after the children left, to play gaily on his pipes: no
doubt rather a forlorn attempt to prove to himself that he did not care.
Then he decided not to take his medicine, so as to grieve Wendy. Then he
lay down on the bed outside the coverlet, to vex her still more; for she
had always tucked them inside it, because you never know that you may
not grow chilly at the turn of the night. Then he nearly cried; but
it struck him how indignant she would be if he laughed instead; so he
laughed a haughty laugh and fell asleep in the middle of it.

Sometimes, though not often, he had dreams, and they were more painful
than the dreams of other boys. For hours he could not be separated from
these dreams, though he wailed piteously in them. They had to do, I
think, with the riddle of his existence. At such times it had been
Wendy's custom to take him out of bed and sit with him on her lap,
soothing him in dear ways of her own invention, and when he grew calmer
to put him back to bed before he quite woke up, so that he should
not know of the indignity to which she had subjected him. But on this
occasion he had fallen at once into a dreamless sleep. One arm dropped
over the edge of the bed, one leg was arched, and the unfinished part of
his laugh was stranded on his mouth, which was open, showing the little
pearls.

Thus defenceless Hook found him. He stood silent at the foot of the tree
looking across the chamber at his enemy. Did no feeling of compassion
disturb his sombre breast? The man was not wholly evil; he loved flowers
(I have been told) and sweet music (he was himself no mean performer on
the harpsichord); and, let it be frankly admitted, the idyllic nature of
the scene stirred him profoundly. Mastered by his better self he would
have returned reluctantly up the tree, but for one thing.

What stayed him was Peter's impertinent appearance as he slept. The
open mouth, the drooping arm, the arched knee: they were such a
personification of cockiness as, taken together, will never again, one
may hope, be presented to eyes so sensitive to their offensiveness. They
steeled Hook's heart. If his rage had broken him into a hundred pieces
every one of them would have disregarded the incident, and leapt at the
sleeper.

Though a light from the one lamp shone dimly on the bed, Hook stood in
darkness himself, and at the first stealthy step forward he discovered
an obstacle, the door of Slightly's tree. It did not entirely fill the
aperture, and he had been looking over it. Feeling for the catch,
he found to his fury that it was low down, beyond his reach. To his
disordered brain it seemed then that the irritating quality in Peter's
face and figure visibly increased, and he rattled the door and flung
himself against it. Was his enemy to escape him after all?

But what was that? The red in his eye had caught sight of Peter's
medicine standing on a ledge within easy reach. He fathomed what it was
straightaway, and immediately knew that the sleeper was in his power.

Lest he should be taken alive, Hook always carried about his person a
dreadful drug, blended by himself of all the death-dealing rings that
had come into his possession. These he had boiled down into a yellow
liquid quite unknown to science, which was probably the most virulent
poison in existence.

Five drops of this he now added to Peter's cup. His hand shook, but it
was in exultation rather than in shame. As he did it he avoided glancing
at the sleeper, but not lest pity should unnerve him; merely to avoid
spilling. Then one long gloating look he cast upon his victim, and
turning, wormed his way with difficulty up the tree. As he emerged
at the top he looked the very spirit of evil breaking from its hole.
Donning his hat at its most rakish angle, he wound his cloak around him,
holding one end in front as if to conceal his person from the night,
of which it was the blackest part, and muttering strangely to himself,
stole away through the trees.

Peter slept on. The light guttered [burned to edges] and went out,
leaving the tenement in darkness; but still he slept. It must have been
not less than ten o'clock by the crocodile, when he suddenly sat up in
his bed, wakened by he knew not what. It was a soft cautious tapping on
the door of his tree.

Soft and cautious, but in that stillness it was sinister. Peter felt for
his dagger till his hand gripped it. Then he spoke.

“Who is that?”

For long there was no answer: then again the knock.

“Who are you?”

No answer.

He was thrilled, and he loved being thrilled. In two strides he reached
the door. Unlike Slightly's door, it filled the aperture [opening], so
that he could not see beyond it, nor could the one knocking see him.

“I won't open unless you speak,” Peter cried.

Then at last the visitor spoke, in a lovely bell-like voice.

“Let me in, Peter.”

It was Tink, and quickly he unbarred to her. She flew in excitedly, her
face flushed and her dress stained with mud.

“What is it?”

“Oh, you could never guess!” she cried, and offered him three guesses.
“Out with it!” he shouted, and in one ungrammatical sentence, as long as
the ribbons that conjurers [magicians] pull from their mouths, she told
of the capture of Wendy and the boys.

Peter's heart bobbed up and down as he listened. Wendy bound, and on the
pirate ship; she who loved everything to be just so!

“I'll rescue her!” he cried, leaping at his weapons. As he leapt he
thought of something he could do to please her. He could take his
medicine.

His hand closed on the fatal draught.

“No!” shrieked Tinker Bell, who had heard Hook mutter about his deed as
he sped through the forest.

“Why not?”

“It is poisoned.”

“Poisoned? Who could have poisoned it?”

“Hook.”

“Don't be silly. How could Hook have got down here?”

Alas, Tinker Bell could not explain this, for even she did not know the
dark secret of Slightly's tree. Nevertheless Hook's words had left no
room for doubt. The cup was poisoned.

“Besides,” said Peter, quite believing himself, “I never fell asleep.”

He raised the cup. No time for words now; time for deeds; and with one
of her lightning movements Tink got between his lips and the draught,
and drained it to the dregs.

“Why, Tink, how dare you drink my medicine?”

But she did not answer. Already she was reeling in the air.

“What is the matter with you?” cried Peter, suddenly afraid.

“It was poisoned, Peter,” she told him softly; “and now I am going to be
dead.”

“O Tink, did you drink it to save me?”

“Yes.”

“But why, Tink?”

Her wings would scarcely carry her now, but in reply she alighted on his
shoulder and gave his nose a loving bite. She whispered in his ear “You
silly ass,” and then, tottering to her chamber, lay down on the bed.

His head almost filled the fourth wall of her little room as he knelt
near her in distress. Every moment her light was growing fainter; and
he knew that if it went out she would be no more. She liked his tears so
much that she put out her beautiful finger and let them run over it.

Her voice was so low that at first he could not make out what she said.
Then he made it out. She was saying that she thought she could get well
again if children believed in fairies.

Peter flung out his arms. There were no children there, and it was night
time; but he addressed all who might be dreaming of the Neverland, and
who were therefore nearer to him than you think: boys and girls in their
nighties, and naked papooses in their baskets hung from trees.

“Do you believe?” he cried.

Tink sat up in bed almost briskly to listen to her fate.

She fancied she heard answers in the affirmative, and then again she
wasn't sure.

“What do you think?” she asked Peter.

“If you believe,” he shouted to them, “clap your hands; don't let Tink
die.”

Many clapped.

Some didn't.

A few beasts hissed.

The clapping stopped suddenly; as if countless mothers had rushed to
their nurseries to see what on earth was happening; but already Tink was
saved. First her voice grew strong, then she popped out of bed, then
she was flashing through the room more merry and impudent than ever. She
never thought of thanking those who believed, but she would have liked to
get at the ones who had hissed.

“And now to rescue Wendy!”

The moon was riding in a cloudy heaven when Peter rose from his tree,
begirt [belted] with weapons and wearing little else, to set out upon
his perilous quest. It was not such a night as he would have chosen.
He had hoped to fly, keeping not far from the ground so that nothing
unwonted should escape his eyes; but in that fitful light to have
flown low would have meant trailing his shadow through the trees, thus
disturbing birds and acquainting a watchful foe that he was astir.

He regretted now that he had given the birds of the island such strange
names that they are very wild and difficult of approach.

There was no other course but to press forward in redskin fashion, at
which happily he was an adept [expert]. But in what direction, for he
could not be sure that the children had been taken to the ship? A
light fall of snow had obliterated all footmarks; and a deathly silence
pervaded the island, as if for a space Nature stood still in horror of
the recent carnage. He had taught the children something of the forest
lore that he had himself learned from Tiger Lily and Tinker Bell,
and knew that in their dire hour they were not likely to forget it.
Slightly, if he had an opportunity, would blaze [cut a mark in] the
trees, for instance, Curly would drop seeds, and Wendy would leave her
handkerchief at some important place. The morning was needed to search
for such guidance, and he could not wait. The upper world had called
him, but would give no help.

The crocodile passed him, but not another living thing, not a sound, not
a movement; and yet he knew well that sudden death might be at the next
tree, or stalking him from behind.

He swore this terrible oath: “Hook or me this time.”

Now he crawled forward like a snake, and again erect, he darted across
a space on which the moonlight played, one finger on his lip and his
dagger at the ready. He was frightfully happy.




Chapter 14 THE PIRATE SHIP

One green light squinting over Kidd's Creek, which is near the mouth of
the pirate river, marked where the brig, the JOLLY ROGER, lay, low in
the water; a rakish-looking [speedy-looking] craft foul to the hull,
every beam in her detestable, like ground strewn with mangled feathers.
She was the cannibal of the seas, and scarce needed that watchful eye,
for she floated immune in the horror of her name.

She was wrapped in the blanket of night, through which no sound from her
could have reached the shore. There was little sound, and none agreeable
save the whir of the ship's sewing machine at which Smee sat, ever
industrious and obliging, the essence of the commonplace, pathetic Smee.
I know not why he was so infinitely pathetic, unless it were because
he was so pathetically unaware of it; but even strong men had to turn
hastily from looking at him, and more than once on summer evenings he
had touched the fount of Hook's tears and made it flow. Of this, as of
almost everything else, Smee was quite unconscious.

A few of the pirates leant over the bulwarks, drinking in the miasma
[putrid mist] of the night; others sprawled by barrels over games of
dice and cards; and the exhausted four who had carried the little house
lay prone on the deck, where even in their sleep they rolled skillfully
to this side or that out of Hook's reach, lest he should claw them
mechanically in passing.

Hook trod the deck in thought. O man unfathomable. It was his hour of
triumph. Peter had been removed for ever from his path, and all the
other boys were in the brig, about to walk the plank. It was his
grimmest deed since the days when he had brought Barbecue to heel; and
knowing as we do how vain a tabernacle is man, could we be surprised
had he now paced the deck unsteadily, bellied out by the winds of his
success?

But there was no elation in his gait, which kept pace with the action of
his sombre mind. Hook was profoundly dejected.

He was often thus when communing with himself on board ship in the
quietude of the night. It was because he was so terribly alone. This
inscrutable man never felt more alone than when surrounded by his dogs.
They were socially inferior to him.

Hook was not his true name. To reveal who he really was would even at
this date set the country in a blaze; but as those who read between the
lines must already have guessed, he had been at a famous public school;
and its traditions still clung to him like garments, with which indeed
they are largely concerned. Thus it was offensive to him even now to
board a ship in the same dress in which he grappled [attacked] her, and
he still adhered in his walk to the school's distinguished slouch. But
above all he retained the passion for good form.

Good form! However much he may have degenerated, he still knew that this
is all that really matters.

From far within him he heard a creaking as of rusty portals, and through
them came a stern tap-tap-tap, like hammering in the night when one
cannot sleep. “Have you been good form to-day?” was their eternal
question.

“Fame, fame, that glittering bauble, it is mine,” he cried.

“Is it quite good form to be distinguished at anything?” the tap-tap
from his school replied.

“I am the only man whom Barbecue feared,” he urged, “and Flint feared
Barbecue.”

“Barbecue, Flint--what house?” came the cutting retort.

Most disquieting reflection of all, was it not bad form to think about
good form?

His vitals were tortured by this problem. It was a claw within him
sharper than the iron one; and as it tore him, the perspiration dripped
down his tallow [waxy] countenance and streaked his doublet. Ofttimes he
drew his sleeve across his face, but there was no damming that trickle.

Ah, envy not Hook.

There came to him a presentiment of his early dissolution [death]. It
was as if Peter's terrible oath had boarded the ship. Hook felt a gloomy
desire to make his dying speech, lest presently there should be no time
for it.

“Better for Hook,” he cried, “if he had had less ambition!” It was in
his darkest hours only that he referred to himself in the third person.

“No little children to love me!”

Strange that he should think of this, which had never troubled him
before; perhaps the sewing machine brought it to his mind. For long he
muttered to himself, staring at Smee, who was hemming placidly, under
the conviction that all children feared him.

Feared him! Feared Smee! There was not a child on board the brig that
night who did not already love him. He had said horrid things to them
and hit them with the palm of his hand, because he could not hit with
his fist, but they had only clung to him the more. Michael had tried on
his spectacles.

To tell poor Smee that they thought him lovable! Hook itched to do it,
but it seemed too brutal. Instead, he revolved this mystery in his
mind: why do they find Smee lovable? He pursued the problem like the
sleuth-hound that he was. If Smee was lovable, what was it that made him
so? A terrible answer suddenly presented itself--“Good form?”

Had the bo'sun good form without knowing it, which is the best form of
all?

He remembered that you have to prove you don't know you have it before
you are eligible for Pop [an elite social club at Eton].

With a cry of rage he raised his iron hand over Smee's head; but he did
not tear. What arrested him was this reflection:

“To claw a man because he is good form, what would that be?”

“Bad form!”

The unhappy Hook was as impotent [powerless] as he was damp, and he fell
forward like a cut flower.

His dogs thinking him out of the way for a time, discipline instantly
relaxed; and they broke into a bacchanalian [drunken] dance, which
brought him to his feet at once, all traces of human weakness gone, as
if a bucket of water had passed over him.

“Quiet, you scugs,” he cried, “or I'll cast anchor in you;” and at once
the din was hushed. “Are all the children chained, so that they cannot
fly away?”

“Ay, ay.”

“Then hoist them up.”

The wretched prisoners were dragged from the hold, all except Wendy,
and ranged in line in front of him. For a time he seemed unconscious
of their presence. He lolled at his ease, humming, not unmelodiously,
snatches of a rude song, and fingering a pack of cards. Ever and anon
the light from his cigar gave a touch of colour to his face.

“Now then, bullies,” he said briskly, “six of you walk the plank
to-night, but I have room for two cabin boys. Which of you is it to be?”

“Don't irritate him unnecessarily,” had been Wendy's instructions in
the hold; so Tootles stepped forward politely. Tootles hated the idea
of signing under such a man, but an instinct told him that it would
be prudent to lay the responsibility on an absent person; and though a
somewhat silly boy, he knew that mothers alone are always willing to be
the buffer. All children know this about mothers, and despise them for
it, but make constant use of it.

So Tootles explained prudently, “You see, sir, I don't think my mother
would like me to be a pirate. Would your mother like you to be a pirate,
Slightly?”

He winked at Slightly, who said mournfully, “I don't think so,” as if
he wished things had been otherwise. “Would your mother like you to be a
pirate, Twin?”

“I don't think so,” said the first twin, as clever as the others. “Nibs,
would--”

“Stow this gab,” roared Hook, and the spokesmen were dragged back. “You,
boy,” he said, addressing John, “you look as if you had a little pluck
in you. Didst never want to be a pirate, my hearty?”

Now John had sometimes experienced this hankering at maths. prep.; and
he was struck by Hook's picking him out.

“I once thought of calling myself Red-handed Jack,” he said diffidently.

“And a good name too. We'll call you that here, bully, if you join.”

“What do you think, Michael?” asked John.

“What would you call me if I join?” Michael demanded.

“Blackbeard Joe.”

Michael was naturally impressed. “What do you think, John?” He wanted
John to decide, and John wanted him to decide.

“Shall we still be respectful subjects of the King?” John inquired.

Through Hook's teeth came the answer: “You would have to swear, 'Down
with the King.'”

Perhaps John had not behaved very well so far, but he shone out now.

“Then I refuse,” he cried, banging the barrel in front of Hook.

“And I refuse,” cried Michael.

“Rule Britannia!” squeaked Curly.

The infuriated pirates buffeted them in the mouth; and Hook roared out,
“That seals your doom. Bring up their mother. Get the plank ready.”

They were only boys, and they went white as they saw Jukes and Cecco
preparing the fatal plank. But they tried to look brave when Wendy was
brought up.

No words of mine can tell you how Wendy despised those pirates. To the
boys there was at least some glamour in the pirate calling; but all that
she saw was that the ship had not been tidied for years. There was not
a porthole on the grimy glass of which you might not have written with
your finger “Dirty pig”; and she had already written it on several. But
as the boys gathered round her she had no thought, of course, save for
them.

“So, my beauty,” said Hook, as if he spoke in syrup, “you are to see
your children walk the plank.”

Fine gentlemen though he was, the intensity of his communings had soiled
his ruff, and suddenly he knew that she was gazing at it. With a hasty
gesture he tried to hide it, but he was too late.

“Are they to die?” asked Wendy, with a look of such frightful contempt
that he nearly fainted.

“They are,” he snarled. “Silence all,” he called gloatingly, “for a
mother's last words to her children.”

At this moment Wendy was grand. “These are my last words, dear boys,”
 she said firmly. “I feel that I have a message to you from your real
mothers, and it is this: 'We hope our sons will die like English
gentlemen.'”

Even the pirates were awed, and Tootles cried out hysterically, “I am
going to do what my mother hopes. What are you to do, Nibs?”

“What my mother hopes. What are you to do, Twin?”

“What my mother hopes. John, what are--”

But Hook had found his voice again.

“Tie her up!” he shouted.

It was Smee who tied her to the mast. “See here, honey,” he whispered,
“I'll save you if you promise to be my mother.”

But not even for Smee would she make such a promise. “I would almost
rather have no children at all,” she said disdainfully [scornfully].

It is sad to know that not a boy was looking at her as Smee tied her to
the mast; the eyes of all were on the plank: that last little walk they
were about to take. They were no longer able to hope that they would
walk it manfully, for the capacity to think had gone from them; they
could stare and shiver only.

Hook smiled on them with his teeth closed, and took a step toward Wendy.
His intention was to turn her face so that she should see the boys
walking the plank one by one. But he never reached her, he never heard
the cry of anguish he hoped to wring from her. He heard something else
instead.

It was the terrible tick-tick of the crocodile.

They all heard it--pirates, boys, Wendy; and immediately every head was
blown in one direction; not to the water whence the sound proceeded, but
toward Hook. All knew that what was about to happen concerned him alone,
and that from being actors they were suddenly become spectators.

Very frightful was it to see the change that came over him. It was as if
he had been clipped at every joint. He fell in a little heap.

The sound came steadily nearer; and in advance of it came this ghastly
thought, “The crocodile is about to board the ship!”

Even the iron claw hung inactive; as if knowing that it was no intrinsic
part of what the attacking force wanted. Left so fearfully alone, any
other man would have lain with his eyes shut where he fell: but the
gigantic brain of Hook was still working, and under its guidance he
crawled on the knees along the deck as far from the sound as he could
go. The pirates respectfully cleared a passage for him, and it was only
when he brought up against the bulwarks that he spoke.

“Hide me!” he cried hoarsely.

They gathered round him, all eyes averted from the thing that was coming
aboard. They had no thought of fighting it. It was Fate.

Only when Hook was hidden from them did curiosity loosen the limbs of
the boys so that they could rush to the ship's side to see the crocodile
climbing it. Then they got the strangest surprise of the Night of
Nights; for it was no crocodile that was coming to their aid. It was
Peter.

He signed to them not to give vent to any cry of admiration that might
rouse suspicion. Then he went on ticking.




Chapter 15 “HOOK OR ME THIS TIME”

Odd things happen to all of us on our way through life without our
noticing for a time that they have happened. Thus, to take an instance,
we suddenly discover that we have been deaf in one ear for we don't know
how long, but, say, half an hour. Now such an experience had come that
night to Peter. When last we saw him he was stealing across the island
with one finger to his lips and his dagger at the ready. He had seen the
crocodile pass by without noticing anything peculiar about it, but by
and by he remembered that it had not been ticking. At first he thought
this eerie, but soon concluded rightly that the clock had run down.

Without giving a thought to what might be the feelings of a
fellow-creature thus abruptly deprived of its closest companion, Peter
began to consider how he could turn the catastrophe to his own use;
and he decided to tick, so that wild beasts should believe he was the
crocodile and let him pass unmolested. He ticked superbly, but with one
unforeseen result. The crocodile was among those who heard the sound,
and it followed him, though whether with the purpose of regaining what
it had lost, or merely as a friend under the belief that it was again
ticking itself, will never be certainly known, for, like slaves to a
fixed idea, it was a stupid beast.

Peter reached the shore without mishap, and went straight on, his legs
encountering the water as if quite unaware that they had entered a new
element. Thus many animals pass from land to water, but no other human
of whom I know. As he swam he had but one thought: “Hook or me this
time.” He had ticked so long that he now went on ticking without knowing
that he was doing it. Had he known he would have stopped, for to board
the brig by help of the tick, though an ingenious idea, had not occurred
to him.

On the contrary, he thought he had scaled her side as noiseless as a
mouse; and he was amazed to see the pirates cowering from him, with Hook
in their midst as abject as if he had heard the crocodile.

The crocodile! No sooner did Peter remember it than he heard the
ticking. At first he thought the sound did come from the crocodile,
and he looked behind him swiftly. Then he realised that he was doing it
himself, and in a flash he understood the situation. “How clever of me!”
 he thought at once, and signed to the boys not to burst into applause.

It was at this moment that Ed Teynte the quartermaster emerged from the
forecastle and came along the deck. Now, reader, time what happened by
your watch. Peter struck true and deep. John clapped his hands on the
ill-fated pirate's mouth to stifle the dying groan. He fell forward.
Four boys caught him to prevent the thud. Peter gave the signal, and the
carrion was cast overboard. There was a splash, and then silence. How
long has it taken?

“One!” (Slightly had begun to count.)

None too soon, Peter, every inch of him on tiptoe, vanished into the
cabin; for more than one pirate was screwing up his courage to look
round. They could hear each other's distressed breathing now, which
showed them that the more terrible sound had passed.

“It's gone, captain,” Smee said, wiping off his spectacles. “All's still
again.”

Slowly Hook let his head emerge from his ruff, and listened so intently
that he could have caught the echo of the tick. There was not a sound,
and he drew himself up firmly to his full height.

“Then here's to Johnny Plank!” he cried brazenly, hating the boys more
than ever because they had seen him unbend. He broke into the villainous
ditty:

     “Yo ho, yo ho, the frisky plank,
     You walks along it so,
     Till it goes down and you goes down
     To Davy Jones below!”

To terrorize the prisoners the more, though with a certain loss of
dignity, he danced along an imaginary plank, grimacing at them as he
sang; and when he finished he cried, “Do you want a touch of the cat [o'
nine tails] before you walk the plank?”

At that they fell on their knees. “No, no!” they cried so piteously that
every pirate smiled.

“Fetch the cat, Jukes,” said Hook; “it's in the cabin.”

The cabin! Peter was in the cabin! The children gazed at each other.

“Ay, ay,” said Jukes blithely, and he strode into the cabin. They
followed him with their eyes; they scarce knew that Hook had resumed his
song, his dogs joining in with him:

     “Yo ho, yo ho, the scratching cat,
     Its tails are nine, you know,
     And when they're writ upon your back--”

What was the last line will never be known, for of a sudden the song was
stayed by a dreadful screech from the cabin. It wailed through the ship,
and died away. Then was heard a crowing sound which was well understood
by the boys, but to the pirates was almost more eerie than the screech.

“What was that?” cried Hook.

“Two,” said Slightly solemnly.

The Italian Cecco hesitated for a moment and then swung into the cabin.
He tottered out, haggard.

“What's the matter with Bill Jukes, you dog?” hissed Hook, towering over
him.

“The matter wi' him is he's dead, stabbed,” replied Cecco in a hollow
voice.

“Bill Jukes dead!” cried the startled pirates.

“The cabin's as black as a pit,” Cecco said, almost gibbering, “but
there is something terrible in there: the thing you heard crowing.”

The exultation of the boys, the lowering looks of the pirates, both were
seen by Hook.

“Cecco,” he said in his most steely voice, “go back and fetch me out
that doodle-doo.”

Cecco, bravest of the brave, cowered before his captain, crying “No,
no”; but Hook was purring to his claw.

“Did you say you would go, Cecco?” he said musingly.

Cecco went, first flinging his arms despairingly. There was no more
singing, all listened now; and again came a death-screech and again a
crow.

No one spoke except Slightly. “Three,” he said.

Hook rallied his dogs with a gesture. “'S'death and odds fish,” he
thundered, “who is to bring me that doodle-doo?”

“Wait till Cecco comes out,” growled Starkey, and the others took up the
cry.

“I think I heard you volunteer, Starkey,” said Hook, purring again.

“No, by thunder!” Starkey cried.

“My hook thinks you did,” said Hook, crossing to him. “I wonder if it
would not be advisable, Starkey, to humour the hook?”

“I'll swing before I go in there,” replied Starkey doggedly, and again
he had the support of the crew.

“Is this mutiny?” asked Hook more pleasantly than ever. “Starkey's
ringleader!”

“Captain, mercy!” Starkey whimpered, all of a tremble now.

“Shake hands, Starkey,” said Hook, proffering his claw.

Starkey looked round for help, but all deserted him. As he backed up
Hook advanced, and now the red spark was in his eye. With a despairing
scream the pirate leapt upon Long Tom and precipitated himself into the
sea.

“Four,” said Slightly.

“And now,” Hook said courteously, “did any other gentlemen say mutiny?”
 Seizing a lantern and raising his claw with a menacing gesture, “I'll
bring out that doodle-doo myself,” he said, and sped into the cabin.

“Five.” How Slightly longed to say it. He wetted his lips to be ready,
but Hook came staggering out, without his lantern.

“Something blew out the light,” he said a little unsteadily.

“Something!” echoed Mullins.

“What of Cecco?” demanded Noodler.

“He's as dead as Jukes,” said Hook shortly.

His reluctance to return to the cabin impressed them all unfavourably,
and the mutinous sounds again broke forth. All pirates are
superstitious, and Cookson cried, “They do say the surest sign a ship's
accurst is when there's one on board more than can be accounted for.”

“I've heard,” muttered Mullins, “he always boards the pirate craft last.
Had he a tail, captain?”

“They say,” said another, looking viciously at Hook, “that when he comes
it's in the likeness of the wickedest man aboard.”

“Had he a hook, captain?” asked Cookson insolently; and one after
another took up the cry, “The ship's doomed!” At this the children could
not resist raising a cheer. Hook had well-nigh forgotten his prisoners,
but as he swung round on them now his face lit up again.

“Lads,” he cried to his crew, “now here's a notion. Open the cabin door
and drive them in. Let them fight the doodle-doo for their lives. If
they kill him, we're so much the better; if he kills them, we're none
the worse.”

For the last time his dogs admired Hook, and devotedly they did his
bidding. The boys, pretending to struggle, were pushed into the cabin
and the door was closed on them.

“Now, listen!” cried Hook, and all listened. But not one dared to face
the door. Yes, one, Wendy, who all this time had been bound to the mast.
It was for neither a scream nor a crow that she was watching, it was for
the reappearance of Peter.

She had not long to wait. In the cabin he had found the thing for which
he had gone in search: the key that would free the children of their
manacles, and now they all stole forth, armed with such weapons as they
could find. First signing them to hide, Peter cut Wendy's bonds,
and then nothing could have been easier than for them all to fly off
together; but one thing barred the way, an oath, “Hook or me this time.”
 So when he had freed Wendy, he whispered for her to conceal herself with
the others, and himself took her place by the mast, her cloak around him
so that he should pass for her. Then he took a great breath and crowed.

To the pirates it was a voice crying that all the boys lay slain in the
cabin; and they were panic-stricken. Hook tried to hearten them; but
like the dogs he had made them they showed him their fangs, and he knew
that if he took his eyes off them now they would leap at him.

“Lads,” he said, ready to cajole or strike as need be, but never
quailing for an instant, “I've thought it out. There's a Jonah aboard.”

“Ay,” they snarled, “a man wi' a hook.”

“No, lads, no, it's the girl. Never was luck on a pirate ship wi' a
woman on board. We'll right the ship when she's gone.”

Some of them remembered that this had been a saying of Flint's. “It's
worth trying,” they said doubtfully.

“Fling the girl overboard,” cried Hook; and they made a rush at the
figure in the cloak.

“There's none can save you now, missy,” Mullins hissed jeeringly.

“There's one,” replied the figure.

“Who's that?”

“Peter Pan the avenger!” came the terrible answer; and as he spoke Peter
flung off his cloak. Then they all knew who 'twas that had been undoing
them in the cabin, and twice Hook essayed to speak and twice he failed.
In that frightful moment I think his fierce heart broke.

At last he cried, “Cleave him to the brisket!” but without conviction.

“Down, boys, and at them!” Peter's voice rang out; and in another moment
the clash of arms was resounding through the ship. Had the pirates kept
together it is certain that they would have won; but the onset came
when they were still unstrung, and they ran hither and thither, striking
wildly, each thinking himself the last survivor of the crew. Man to man
they were the stronger; but they fought on the defensive only, which
enabled the boys to hunt in pairs and choose their quarry. Some of the
miscreants leapt into the sea; others hid in dark recesses, where they
were found by Slightly, who did not fight, but ran about with a lantern
which he flashed in their faces, so that they were half blinded and
fell as an easy prey to the reeking swords of the other boys. There was
little sound to be heard but the clang of weapons, an occasional
screech or splash, and Slightly monotonously counting--five--six--seven
eight--nine--ten--eleven.

I think all were gone when a group of savage boys surrounded Hook, who
seemed to have a charmed life, as he kept them at bay in that circle
of fire. They had done for his dogs, but this man alone seemed to be a
match for them all. Again and again they closed upon him, and again and
again he hewed a clear space. He had lifted up one boy with his hook,
and was using him as a buckler [shield], when another, who had just
passed his sword through Mullins, sprang into the fray.

“Put up your swords, boys,” cried the newcomer, “this man is mine.”

Thus suddenly Hook found himself face to face with Peter. The others
drew back and formed a ring around them.

For long the two enemies looked at one another, Hook shuddering
slightly, and Peter with the strange smile upon his face.

“So, Pan,” said Hook at last, “this is all your doing.”

“Ay, James Hook,” came the stern answer, “it is all my doing.”

“Proud and insolent youth,” said Hook, “prepare to meet thy doom.”

“Dark and sinister man,” Peter answered, “have at thee.”

Without more words they fell to, and for a space there was no advantage
to either blade. Peter was a superb swordsman, and parried with dazzling
rapidity; ever and anon he followed up a feint with a lunge that got
past his foe's defence, but his shorter reach stood him in ill stead,
and he could not drive the steel home. Hook, scarcely his inferior in
brilliancy, but not quite so nimble in wrist play, forced him back by
the weight of his onset, hoping suddenly to end all with a favourite
thrust, taught him long ago by Barbecue at Rio; but to his astonishment
he found this thrust turned aside again and again. Then he sought to
close and give the quietus with his iron hook, which all this time had
been pawing the air; but Peter doubled under it and, lunging fiercely,
pierced him in the ribs. At the sight of his own blood, whose peculiar
colour, you remember, was offensive to him, the sword fell from Hook's
hand, and he was at Peter's mercy.

“Now!” cried all the boys, but with a magnificent gesture Peter invited
his opponent to pick up his sword. Hook did so instantly, but with a
tragic feeling that Peter was showing good form.

Hitherto he had thought it was some fiend fighting him, but darker
suspicions assailed him now.

“Pan, who and what art thou?” he cried huskily.

“I'm youth, I'm joy,” Peter answered at a venture, “I'm a little bird
that has broken out of the egg.”

This, of course, was nonsense; but it was proof to the unhappy Hook that
Peter did not know in the least who or what he was, which is the very
pinnacle of good form.

“To't again,” he cried despairingly.

He fought now like a human flail, and every sweep of that terrible sword
would have severed in twain any man or boy who obstructed it; but Peter
fluttered round him as if the very wind it made blew him out of the
danger zone. And again and again he darted in and pricked.

Hook was fighting now without hope. That passionate breast no longer
asked for life; but for one boon it craved: to see Peter show bad form
before it was cold forever.

Abandoning the fight he rushed into the powder magazine and fired it.

“In two minutes,” he cried, “the ship will be blown to pieces.”

Now, now, he thought, true form will show.

But Peter issued from the powder magazine with the shell in his hands,
and calmly flung it overboard.

What sort of form was Hook himself showing? Misguided man though he was,
we may be glad, without sympathising with him, that in the end he was
true to the traditions of his race. The other boys were flying around
him now, flouting, scornful; and he staggered about the deck striking up
at them impotently, his mind was no longer with them; it was slouching
in the playing fields of long ago, or being sent up [to the headmaster]
for good, or watching the wall-game from a famous wall. And his shoes
were right, and his waistcoat was right, and his tie was right, and his
socks were right.

James Hook, thou not wholly unheroic figure, farewell.

For we have come to his last moment.

Seeing Peter slowly advancing upon him through the air with dagger
poised, he sprang upon the bulwarks to cast himself into the sea. He
did not know that the crocodile was waiting for him; for we purposely
stopped the clock that this knowledge might be spared him: a little mark
of respect from us at the end.

He had one last triumph, which I think we need not grudge him. As he
stood on the bulwark looking over his shoulder at Peter gliding through
the air, he invited him with a gesture to use his foot. It made Peter
kick instead of stab.

At last Hook had got the boon for which he craved.

“Bad form,” he cried jeeringly, and went content to the crocodile.

Thus perished James Hook.

“Seventeen,” Slightly sang out; but he was not quite correct in his
figures. Fifteen paid the penalty for their crimes that night; but two
reached the shore: Starkey to be captured by the redskins, who made him
nurse for all their papooses, a melancholy come-down for a pirate; and
Smee, who henceforth wandered about the world in his spectacles, making
a precarious living by saying he was the only man that Jas. Hook had
feared.

Wendy, of course, had stood by taking no part in the fight, though
watching Peter with glistening eyes; but now that all was over she
became prominent again. She praised them equally, and shuddered
delightfully when Michael showed her the place where he had killed one;
and then she took them into Hook's cabin and pointed to his watch which
was hanging on a nail. It said “half-past one!”

The lateness of the hour was almost the biggest thing of all. She got
them to bed in the pirates' bunks pretty quickly, you may be sure; all
but Peter, who strutted up and down on the deck, until at last he fell
asleep by the side of Long Tom. He had one of his dreams that night, and
cried in his sleep for a long time, and Wendy held him tightly.




Chapter 16 THE RETURN HOME

By three bells that morning they were all stirring their stumps [legs];
for there was a big sea running; and Tootles, the bo'sun, was among
them, with a rope's end in his hand and chewing tobacco. They all donned
pirate clothes cut off at the knee, shaved smartly, and tumbled up, with
the true nautical roll and hitching their trousers.

It need not be said who was the captain. Nibs and John were first and
second mate. There was a woman aboard. The rest were tars [sailors]
before the mast, and lived in the fo'c'sle. Peter had already lashed
himself to the wheel; but he piped all hands and delivered a short
address to them; said he hoped they would do their duty like gallant
hearties, but that he knew they were the scum of Rio and the Gold Coast,
and if they snapped at him he would tear them. The bluff strident words
struck the note sailors understood, and they cheered him lustily. Then
a few sharp orders were given, and they turned the ship round, and nosed
her for the mainland.

Captain Pan calculated, after consulting the ship's chart, that if this
weather lasted they should strike the Azores about the 21st of June,
after which it would save time to fly.

Some of them wanted it to be an honest ship and others were in favour
of keeping it a pirate; but the captain treated them as dogs, and they
dared not express their wishes to him even in a round robin [one person
after another, as they had to Cpt. Hook]. Instant obedience was the only
safe thing. Slightly got a dozen for looking perplexed when told to take
soundings. The general feeling was that Peter was honest just now to
lull Wendy's suspicions, but that there might be a change when the new
suit was ready, which, against her will, she was making for him out of
some of Hook's wickedest garments. It was afterwards whispered among
them that on the first night he wore this suit he sat long in the cabin
with Hook's cigar-holder in his mouth and one hand clenched, all but for
the forefinger, which he bent and held threateningly aloft like a hook.

Instead of watching the ship, however, we must now return to that
desolate home from which three of our characters had taken heartless
flight so long ago. It seems a shame to have neglected No. 14 all this
time; and yet we may be sure that Mrs. Darling does not blame us. If we
had returned sooner to look with sorrowful sympathy at her, she would
probably have cried, “Don't be silly; what do I matter? Do go back and
keep an eye on the children.” So long as mothers are like this their
children will take advantage of them; and they may lay to [bet on] that.

Even now we venture into that familiar nursery only because its lawful
occupants are on their way home; we are merely hurrying on in advance
of them to see that their beds are properly aired and that Mr. and Mrs.
Darling do not go out for the evening. We are no more than servants. Why
on earth should their beds be properly aired, seeing that they left them
in such a thankless hurry? Would it not serve them jolly well right if
they came back and found that their parents were spending the week-end
in the country? It would be the moral lesson they have been in need
of ever since we met them; but if we contrived things in this way Mrs.
Darling would never forgive us.

One thing I should like to do immensely, and that is to tell her, in the
way authors have, that the children are coming back, that indeed they
will be here on Thursday week. This would spoil so completely the
surprise to which Wendy and John and Michael are looking forward. They
have been planning it out on the ship: mother's rapture, father's shout
of joy, Nana's leap through the air to embrace them first, when what
they ought to be prepared for is a good hiding. How delicious to spoil
it all by breaking the news in advance; so that when they enter grandly
Mrs. Darling may not even offer Wendy her mouth, and Mr. Darling may
exclaim pettishly, “Dash it all, here are those boys again.” However,
we should get no thanks even for this. We are beginning to know Mrs.
Darling by this time, and may be sure that she would upbraid us for
depriving the children of their little pleasure.

“But, my dear madam, it is ten days till Thursday week; so that by
telling you what's what, we can save you ten days of unhappiness.”

“Yes, but at what a cost! By depriving the children of ten minutes of
delight.”

“Oh, if you look at it in that way!”

“What other way is there in which to look at it?”

You see, the woman had no proper spirit. I had meant to say
extraordinarily nice things about her; but I despise her, and not one of
them will I say now. She does not really need to be told to have things
ready, for they are ready. All the beds are aired, and she never leaves
the house, and observe, the window is open. For all the use we are to
her, we might well go back to the ship. However, as we are here we may
as well stay and look on. That is all we are, lookers-on. Nobody really
wants us. So let us watch and say jaggy things, in the hope that some of
them will hurt.

The only change to be seen in the night-nursery is that between nine
and six the kennel is no longer there. When the children flew away, Mr.
Darling felt in his bones that all the blame was his for having chained
Nana up, and that from first to last she had been wiser than he. Of
course, as we have seen, he was quite a simple man; indeed he might have
passed for a boy again if he had been able to take his baldness off;
but he had also a noble sense of justice and a lion's courage to do what
seemed right to him; and having thought the matter out with anxious care
after the flight of the children, he went down on all fours and crawled
into the kennel. To all Mrs. Darling's dear invitations to him to come
out he replied sadly but firmly:

“No, my own one, this is the place for me.”

In the bitterness of his remorse he swore that he would never leave
the kennel until his children came back. Of course this was a pity; but
whatever Mr. Darling did he had to do in excess, otherwise he soon gave
up doing it. And there never was a more humble man than the once proud
George Darling, as he sat in the kennel of an evening talking with his
wife of their children and all their pretty ways.

Very touching was his deference to Nana. He would not let her come into
the kennel, but on all other matters he followed her wishes implicitly.

Every morning the kennel was carried with Mr. Darling in it to a cab,
which conveyed him to his office, and he returned home in the same way
at six. Something of the strength of character of the man will be seen
if we remember how sensitive he was to the opinion of neighbours: this
man whose every movement now attracted surprised attention. Inwardly he
must have suffered torture; but he preserved a calm exterior even when
the young criticised his little home, and he always lifted his hat
courteously to any lady who looked inside.

It may have been Quixotic, but it was magnificent. Soon the inward
meaning of it leaked out, and the great heart of the public was touched.
Crowds followed the cab, cheering it lustily; charming girls scaled it
to get his autograph; interviews appeared in the better class of papers,
and society invited him to dinner and added, “Do come in the kennel.”

On that eventful Thursday week, Mrs. Darling was in the night-nursery
awaiting George's return home; a very sad-eyed woman. Now that we look
at her closely and remember the gaiety of her in the old days, all gone
now just because she has lost her babes, I find I won't be able to say
nasty things about her after all. If she was too fond of her rubbishy
children, she couldn't help it. Look at her in her chair, where she has
fallen asleep. The corner of her mouth, where one looks first, is almost
withered up. Her hand moves restlessly on her breast as if she had a
pain there. Some like Peter best, and some like Wendy best, but I like
her best. Suppose, to make her happy, we whisper to her in her sleep
that the brats are coming back. They are really within two miles of the
window now, and flying strong, but all we need whisper is that they are
on the way. Let's.

It is a pity we did it, for she has started up, calling their names; and
there is no one in the room but Nana.

“O Nana, I dreamt my dear ones had come back.”

Nana had filmy eyes, but all she could do was put her paw gently on her
mistress's lap; and they were sitting together thus when the kennel was
brought back. As Mr. Darling puts his head out to kiss his wife, we see
that his face is more worn than of yore, but has a softer expression.

He gave his hat to Liza, who took it scornfully; for she had no
imagination, and was quite incapable of understanding the motives of
such a man. Outside, the crowd who had accompanied the cab home were
still cheering, and he was naturally not unmoved.

“Listen to them,” he said; “it is very gratifying.”

“Lots of little boys,” sneered Liza.

“There were several adults to-day,” he assured her with a faint flush;
but when she tossed her head he had not a word of reproof for her.
Social success had not spoilt him; it had made him sweeter. For some
time he sat with his head out of the kennel, talking with Mrs. Darling
of this success, and pressing her hand reassuringly when she said she
hoped his head would not be turned by it.

“But if I had been a weak man,” he said. “Good heavens, if I had been a
weak man!”

“And, George,” she said timidly, “you are as full of remorse as ever,
aren't you?”

“Full of remorse as ever, dearest! See my punishment: living in a
kennel.”

“But it is punishment, isn't it, George? You are sure you are not
enjoying it?”

“My love!”

You may be sure she begged his pardon; and then, feeling drowsy, he
curled round in the kennel.

“Won't you play me to sleep,” he asked, “on the nursery piano?” and as
she was crossing to the day-nursery he added thoughtlessly, “And shut
that window. I feel a draught.”

“O George, never ask me to do that. The window must always be left open
for them, always, always.”

Now it was his turn to beg her pardon; and she went into the day-nursery
and played, and soon he was asleep; and while he slept, Wendy and John
and Michael flew into the room.

Oh no. We have written it so, because that was the charming arrangement
planned by them before we left the ship; but something must have
happened since then, for it is not they who have flown in, it is Peter
and Tinker Bell.

Peter's first words tell all.

“Quick Tink,” he whispered, “close the window; bar it! That's right. Now
you and I must get away by the door; and when Wendy comes she will think
her mother has barred her out; and she will have to go back with me.”

Now I understand what had hitherto puzzled me, why when Peter had
exterminated the pirates he did not return to the island and leave Tink
to escort the children to the mainland. This trick had been in his head
all the time.

Instead of feeling that he was behaving badly he danced with glee; then
he peeped into the day-nursery to see who was playing. He whispered to
Tink, “It's Wendy's mother! She is a pretty lady, but not so pretty as
my mother. Her mouth is full of thimbles, but not so full as my mother's
was.”

Of course he knew nothing whatever about his mother; but he sometimes
bragged about her.

He did not know the tune, which was “Home, Sweet Home,” but he knew it
was saying, “Come back, Wendy, Wendy, Wendy”; and he cried exultantly,
“You will never see Wendy again, lady, for the window is barred!”

He peeped in again to see why the music had stopped, and now he saw
that Mrs. Darling had laid her head on the box, and that two tears were
sitting on her eyes.

“She wants me to unbar the window,” thought Peter, “but I won't, not I!”

He peeped again, and the tears were still there, or another two had
taken their place.

“She's awfully fond of Wendy,” he said to himself. He was angry with her
now for not seeing why she could not have Wendy.

The reason was so simple: “I'm fond of her too. We can't both have her,
lady.”

But the lady would not make the best of it, and he was unhappy. He
ceased to look at her, but even then she would not let go of him. He
skipped about and made funny faces, but when he stopped it was just as
if she were inside him, knocking.

“Oh, all right,” he said at last, and gulped. Then he unbarred the
window. “Come on, Tink,” he cried, with a frightful sneer at the laws of
nature; “we don't want any silly mothers;” and he flew away.

Thus Wendy and John and Michael found the window open for them after
all, which of course was more than they deserved. They alighted on the
floor, quite unashamed of themselves, and the youngest one had already
forgotten his home.

“John,” he said, looking around him doubtfully, “I think I have been
here before.”

“Of course you have, you silly. There is your old bed.”

“So it is,” Michael said, but not with much conviction.

“I say,” cried John, “the kennel!” and he dashed across to look into it.

“Perhaps Nana is inside it,” Wendy said.

But John whistled. “Hullo,” he said, “there's a man inside it.”

“It's father!” exclaimed Wendy.

“Let me see father,” Michael begged eagerly, and he took a good look.
“He is not so big as the pirate I killed,” he said with such frank
disappointment that I am glad Mr. Darling was asleep; it would have been
sad if those had been the first words he heard his little Michael say.

Wendy and John had been taken aback somewhat at finding their father in
the kennel.

“Surely,” said John, like one who had lost faith in his memory, “he used
not to sleep in the kennel?”

“John,” Wendy said falteringly, “perhaps we don't remember the old life
as well as we thought we did.”

A chill fell upon them; and serve them right.

“It is very careless of mother,” said that young scoundrel John, “not to
be here when we come back.”

It was then that Mrs. Darling began playing again.

“It's mother!” cried Wendy, peeping.

“So it is!” said John.

“Then are you not really our mother, Wendy?” asked Michael, who was
surely sleepy.

“Oh dear!” exclaimed Wendy, with her first real twinge of remorse [for
having gone], “it was quite time we came back.”

“Let us creep in,” John suggested, “and put our hands over her eyes.”

But Wendy, who saw that they must break the joyous news more gently, had
a better plan.

“Let us all slip into our beds, and be there when she comes in, just as
if we had never been away.”

And so when Mrs. Darling went back to the night-nursery to see if her
husband was asleep, all the beds were occupied. The children waited
for her cry of joy, but it did not come. She saw them, but she did not
believe they were there. You see, she saw them in their beds so often in
her dreams that she thought this was just the dream hanging around her
still.

She sat down in the chair by the fire, where in the old days she had
nursed them.

They could not understand this, and a cold fear fell upon all the three
of them.

“Mother!” Wendy cried.

“That's Wendy,” she said, but still she was sure it was the dream.

“Mother!”

“That's John,” she said.

“Mother!” cried Michael. He knew her now.

“That's Michael,” she said, and she stretched out her arms for the three
little selfish children they would never envelop again. Yes, they did,
they went round Wendy and John and Michael, who had slipped out of bed
and run to her.

“George, George!” she cried when she could speak; and Mr. Darling woke
to share her bliss, and Nana came rushing in. There could not have been
a lovelier sight; but there was none to see it except a little boy who
was staring in at the window. He had had ecstasies innumerable that
other children can never know; but he was looking through the window at
the one joy from which he must be for ever barred.




Chapter 17 WHEN WENDY GREW UP

I hope you want to know what became of the other boys. They were waiting
below to give Wendy time to explain about them; and when they had
counted five hundred they went up. They went up by the stair, because
they thought this would make a better impression. They stood in a row
in front of Mrs. Darling, with their hats off, and wishing they were not
wearing their pirate clothes. They said nothing, but their eyes asked
her to have them. They ought to have looked at Mr. Darling also, but
they forgot about him.

Of course Mrs. Darling said at once that she would have them; but Mr.
Darling was curiously depressed, and they saw that he considered six a
rather large number.

“I must say,” he said to Wendy, “that you don't do things by halves,” a
grudging remark which the twins thought was pointed at them.

The first twin was the proud one, and he asked, flushing, “Do you think
we should be too much of a handful, sir? Because, if so, we can go
away.”

“Father!” Wendy cried, shocked; but still the cloud was on him. He knew
he was behaving unworthily, but he could not help it.

“We could lie doubled up,” said Nibs.

“I always cut their hair myself,” said Wendy.

“George!” Mrs. Darling exclaimed, pained to see her dear one showing
himself in such an unfavourable light.

Then he burst into tears, and the truth came out. He was as glad to
have them as she was, he said, but he thought they should have asked his
consent as well as hers, instead of treating him as a cypher [zero] in
his own house.

“I don't think he is a cypher,” Tootles cried instantly. “Do you think
he is a cypher, Curly?”

“No, I don't. Do you think he is a cypher, Slightly?”

“Rather not. Twin, what do you think?”

It turned out that not one of them thought him a cypher; and he was
absurdly gratified, and said he would find space for them all in the
drawing-room if they fitted in.

“We'll fit in, sir,” they assured him.

“Then follow the leader,” he cried gaily. “Mind you, I am not sure that
we have a drawing-room, but we pretend we have, and it's all the same.
Hoop la!”

He went off dancing through the house, and they all cried “Hoop la!” and
danced after him, searching for the drawing-room; and I forget whether
they found it, but at any rate they found corners, and they all fitted
in.

As for Peter, he saw Wendy once again before he flew away. He did not
exactly come to the window, but he brushed against it in passing so that
she could open it if she liked and call to him. That is what she did.

“Hullo, Wendy, good-bye,” he said.

“Oh dear, are you going away?”

“Yes.”

“You don't feel, Peter,” she said falteringly, “that you would like to
say anything to my parents about a very sweet subject?”

“No.”

“About me, Peter?”

“No.”

Mrs. Darling came to the window, for at present she was keeping a sharp
eye on Wendy. She told Peter that she had adopted all the other boys,
and would like to adopt him also.

“Would you send me to school?” he inquired craftily.

“Yes.”

“And then to an office?”

“I suppose so.”

“Soon I would be a man?”

“Very soon.”

“I don't want to go to school and learn solemn things,” he told her
passionately. “I don't want to be a man. O Wendy's mother, if I was to
wake up and feel there was a beard!”

“Peter,” said Wendy the comforter, “I should love you in a beard;” and
Mrs. Darling stretched out her arms to him, but he repulsed her.

“Keep back, lady, no one is going to catch me and make me a man.”

“But where are you going to live?”

“With Tink in the house we built for Wendy. The fairies are to put it
high up among the tree tops where they sleep at nights.”

“How lovely,” cried Wendy so longingly that Mrs. Darling tightened her
grip.

“I thought all the fairies were dead,” Mrs. Darling said.

“There are always a lot of young ones,” explained Wendy, who was now
quite an authority, “because you see when a new baby laughs for the
first time a new fairy is born, and as there are always new babies there
are always new fairies. They live in nests on the tops of trees; and the
mauve ones are boys and the white ones are girls, and the blue ones are
just little sillies who are not sure what they are.”

“I shall have such fun,” said Peter, with eye on Wendy.

“It will be rather lonely in the evening,” she said, “sitting by the
fire.”

“I shall have Tink.”

“Tink can't go a twentieth part of the way round,” she reminded him a
little tartly.

“Sneaky tell-tale!” Tink called out from somewhere round the corner.

“It doesn't matter,” Peter said.

“O Peter, you know it matters.”

“Well, then, come with me to the little house.”

“May I, mummy?”

“Certainly not. I have got you home again, and I mean to keep you.”

“But he does so need a mother.”

“So do you, my love.”

“Oh, all right,” Peter said, as if he had asked her from politeness
merely; but Mrs. Darling saw his mouth twitch, and she made this
handsome offer: to let Wendy go to him for a week every year to do
his spring cleaning. Wendy would have preferred a more permanent
arrangement; and it seemed to her that spring would be long in coming;
but this promise sent Peter away quite gay again. He had no sense of
time, and was so full of adventures that all I have told you about him
is only a halfpenny-worth of them. I suppose it was because Wendy knew
this that her last words to him were these rather plaintive ones:

“You won't forget me, Peter, will you, before spring cleaning time
comes?”

Of course Peter promised; and then he flew away. He took Mrs. Darling's
kiss with him. The kiss that had been for no one else, Peter took quite
easily. Funny. But she seemed satisfied.

Of course all the boys went to school; and most of them got into Class
III, but Slightly was put first into Class IV and then into Class V.
Class I is the top class. Before they had attended school a week they
saw what goats they had been not to remain on the island; but it was too
late now, and soon they settled down to being as ordinary as you or me
or Jenkins minor [the younger Jenkins]. It is sad to have to say that
the power to fly gradually left them. At first Nana tied their feet to
the bed-posts so that they should not fly away in the night; and one of
their diversions by day was to pretend to fall off buses [the English
double-deckers]; but by and by they ceased to tug at their bonds in bed,
and found that they hurt themselves when they let go of the bus. In time
they could not even fly after their hats. Want of practice, they called
it; but what it really meant was that they no longer believed.

Michael believed longer than the other boys, though they jeered at him;
so he was with Wendy when Peter came for her at the end of the first
year. She flew away with Peter in the frock she had woven from leaves
and berries in the Neverland, and her one fear was that he might notice
how short it had become; but he never noticed, he had so much to say
about himself.

She had looked forward to thrilling talks with him about old times, but
new adventures had crowded the old ones from his mind.

“Who is Captain Hook?” he asked with interest when she spoke of the arch
enemy.

“Don't you remember,” she asked, amazed, “how you killed him and saved
all our lives?”

“I forget them after I kill them,” he replied carelessly.

When she expressed a doubtful hope that Tinker Bell would be glad to see
her he said, “Who is Tinker Bell?”

“O Peter,” she said, shocked; but even when she explained he could not
remember.

“There are such a lot of them,” he said. “I expect she is no more.”

I expect he was right, for fairies don't live long, but they are so
little that a short time seems a good while to them.

Wendy was pained too to find that the past year was but as yesterday
to Peter; it had seemed such a long year of waiting to her. But he was
exactly as fascinating as ever, and they had a lovely spring cleaning in
the little house on the tree tops.

Next year he did not come for her. She waited in a new frock because the
old one simply would not meet; but he never came.

“Perhaps he is ill,” Michael said.

“You know he is never ill.”

Michael came close to her and whispered, with a shiver, “Perhaps there
is no such person, Wendy!” and then Wendy would have cried if Michael
had not been crying.

Peter came next spring cleaning; and the strange thing was that he never
knew he had missed a year.

That was the last time the girl Wendy ever saw him. For a little longer
she tried for his sake not to have growing pains; and she felt she was
untrue to him when she got a prize for general knowledge. But the years
came and went without bringing the careless boy; and when they met again
Wendy was a married woman, and Peter was no more to her than a little
dust in the box in which she had kept her toys. Wendy was grown up. You
need not be sorry for her. She was one of the kind that likes to grow
up. In the end she grew up of her own free will a day quicker than other
girls.

All the boys were grown up and done for by this time; so it is scarcely
worth while saying anything more about them. You may see the twins and
Nibs and Curly any day going to an office, each carrying a little bag
and an umbrella. Michael is an engine-driver [train engineer]. Slightly
married a lady of title, and so he became a lord. You see that judge in
a wig coming out at the iron door? That used to be Tootles. The bearded
man who doesn't know any story to tell his children was once John.

Wendy was married in white with a pink sash. It is strange to think
that Peter did not alight in the church and forbid the banns [formal
announcement of a marriage].

Years rolled on again, and Wendy had a daughter. This ought not to be
written in ink but in a golden splash.

She was called Jane, and always had an odd inquiring look, as if from
the moment she arrived on the mainland she wanted to ask questions. When
she was old enough to ask them they were mostly about Peter Pan. She
loved to hear of Peter, and Wendy told her all she could remember in the
very nursery from which the famous flight had taken place. It was
Jane's nursery now, for her father had bought it at the three per cents
[mortgage rate] from Wendy's father, who was no longer fond of stairs.
Mrs. Darling was now dead and forgotten.

There were only two beds in the nursery now, Jane's and her nurse's; and
there was no kennel, for Nana also had passed away. She died of old age,
and at the end she had been rather difficult to get on with; being very
firmly convinced that no one knew how to look after children except
herself.

Once a week Jane's nurse had her evening off; and then it was Wendy's
part to put Jane to bed. That was the time for stories. It was Jane's
invention to raise the sheet over her mother's head and her own, thus
making a tent, and in the awful darkness to whisper:

“What do we see now?”

“I don't think I see anything to-night,” says Wendy, with a feeling that
if Nana were here she would object to further conversation.

“Yes, you do,” says Jane, “you see when you were a little girl.”

“That is a long time ago, sweetheart,” says Wendy. “Ah me, how time
flies!”

“Does it fly,” asks the artful child, “the way you flew when you were a
little girl?”

“The way I flew? Do you know, Jane, I sometimes wonder whether I ever
did really fly.”

“Yes, you did.”

“The dear old days when I could fly!”

“Why can't you fly now, mother?”

“Because I am grown up, dearest. When people grow up they forget the
way.”

“Why do they forget the way?”

“Because they are no longer gay and innocent and heartless. It is only
the gay and innocent and heartless who can fly.”

“What is gay and innocent and heartless? I do wish I were gay and
innocent and heartless.”

Or perhaps Wendy admits she does see something.

“I do believe,” she says, “that it is this nursery.”

“I do believe it is,” says Jane. “Go on.”

They are now embarked on the great adventure of the night when Peter
flew in looking for his shadow.

“The foolish fellow,” says Wendy, “tried to stick it on with soap, and
when he could not he cried, and that woke me, and I sewed it on for
him.”

“You have missed a bit,” interrupts Jane, who now knows the story better
than her mother. “When you saw him sitting on the floor crying, what did
you say?”

“I sat up in bed and I said, 'Boy, why are you crying?'”

“Yes, that was it,” says Jane, with a big breath.

“And then he flew us all away to the Neverland and the fairies and the
pirates and the redskins and the mermaids' lagoon, and the home under
the ground, and the little house.”

“Yes! which did you like best of all?”

“I think I liked the home under the ground best of all.”

“Yes, so do I. What was the last thing Peter ever said to you?”

“The last thing he ever said to me was, 'Just always be waiting for me,
and then some night you will hear me crowing.'”

“Yes.”

“But, alas, he forgot all about me,” Wendy said it with a smile. She was
as grown up as that.

“What did his crow sound like?” Jane asked one evening.

“It was like this,” Wendy said, trying to imitate Peter's crow.

“No, it wasn't,” Jane said gravely, “it was like this;” and she did it
ever so much better than her mother.

Wendy was a little startled. “My darling, how can you know?”

“I often hear it when I am sleeping,” Jane said.

“Ah yes, many girls hear it when they are sleeping, but I was the only
one who heard it awake.”

“Lucky you,” said Jane.

And then one night came the tragedy. It was the spring of the year, and
the story had been told for the night, and Jane was now asleep in her
bed. Wendy was sitting on the floor, very close to the fire, so as to
see to darn, for there was no other light in the nursery; and while she
sat darning she heard a crow. Then the window blew open as of old, and
Peter dropped in on the floor.

He was exactly the same as ever, and Wendy saw at once that he still had
all his first teeth.

He was a little boy, and she was grown up. She huddled by the fire not
daring to move, helpless and guilty, a big woman.

“Hullo, Wendy,” he said, not noticing any difference, for he was
thinking chiefly of himself; and in the dim light her white dress might
have been the nightgown in which he had seen her first.

“Hullo, Peter,” she replied faintly, squeezing herself as small as
possible. Something inside her was crying “Woman, Woman, let go of me.”

“Hullo, where is John?” he asked, suddenly missing the third bed.

“John is not here now,” she gasped.

“Is Michael asleep?” he asked, with a careless glance at Jane.

“Yes,” she answered; and now she felt that she was untrue to Jane as
well as to Peter.

“That is not Michael,” she said quickly, lest a judgment should fall on
her.

Peter looked. “Hullo, is it a new one?”

“Yes.”

“Boy or girl?”

“Girl.”

Now surely he would understand; but not a bit of it.

“Peter,” she said, faltering, “are you expecting me to fly away with
you?”

“Of course; that is why I have come.” He added a little sternly, “Have
you forgotten that this is spring cleaning time?”

She knew it was useless to say that he had let many spring cleaning
times pass.

“I can't come,” she said apologetically, “I have forgotten how to fly.”

“I'll soon teach you again.”

“O Peter, don't waste the fairy dust on me.”

She had risen; and now at last a fear assailed him. “What is it?” he
cried, shrinking.

“I will turn up the light,” she said, “and then you can see for
yourself.”

For almost the only time in his life that I know of, Peter was afraid.
“Don't turn up the light,” he cried.

She let her hands play in the hair of the tragic boy. She was not a
little girl heart-broken about him; she was a grown woman smiling at it
all, but they were wet-eyed smiles.

Then she turned up the light, and Peter saw. He gave a cry of pain; and
when the tall beautiful creature stooped to lift him in her arms he drew
back sharply.

“What is it?” he cried again.

She had to tell him.

“I am old, Peter. I am ever so much more than twenty. I grew up long
ago.”

“You promised not to!”

“I couldn't help it. I am a married woman, Peter.”

“No, you're not.”

“Yes, and the little girl in the bed is my baby.”

“No, she's not.”

But he supposed she was; and he took a step towards the sleeping child
with his dagger upraised. Of course he did not strike. He sat down on
the floor instead and sobbed; and Wendy did not know how to comfort him,
though she could have done it so easily once. She was only a woman now,
and she ran out of the room to try to think.

Peter continued to cry, and soon his sobs woke Jane. She sat up in bed,
and was interested at once.

“Boy,” she said, “why are you crying?”

Peter rose and bowed to her, and she bowed to him from the bed.

“Hullo,” he said.

“Hullo,” said Jane.

“My name is Peter Pan,” he told her.

“Yes, I know.”

“I came back for my mother,” he explained, “to take her to the
Neverland.”

“Yes, I know,” Jane said, “I have been waiting for you.”

When Wendy returned diffidently she found Peter sitting on the bed-post
crowing gloriously, while Jane in her nighty was flying round the room
in solemn ecstasy.

“She is my mother,” Peter explained; and Jane descended and stood by his
side, with the look in her face that he liked to see on ladies when they
gazed at him.

“He does so need a mother,” Jane said.

“Yes, I know,” Wendy admitted rather forlornly; “no one knows it so well
as I.”

“Good-bye,” said Peter to Wendy; and he rose in the air, and the
shameless Jane rose with him; it was already her easiest way of moving
about.

Wendy rushed to the window.

“No, no,” she cried.

“It is just for spring cleaning time,” Jane said, “he wants me always to
do his spring cleaning.”

“If only I could go with you,” Wendy sighed.

“You see you can't fly,” said Jane.

Of course in the end Wendy let them fly away together. Our last glimpse
of her shows her at the window, watching them receding into the sky
until they were as small as stars.

As you look at Wendy, you may see her hair becoming white, and her
figure little again, for all this happened long ago. Jane is now a
common grown-up, with a daughter called Margaret; and every spring
cleaning time, except when he forgets, Peter comes for Margaret and
takes her to the Neverland, where she tells him stories about himself,
to which he listens eagerly. When Margaret grows up she will have a
daughter, who is to be Peter's mother in turn; and thus it will go on,
so long as children are gay and innocent and heartless.


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Peter Pan, by James M. Barrie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PETER PAN ***

***** This file should be named 16-0.txt or 16-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/16/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the
PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING with public
domain eBooks. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Twilight Land, by Howard Pyle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Twilight Land

Author: Howard Pyle

Posting Date: November 20, 2008 [EBook #1751]
Release Date: May, 1999
Last Updated: October 25, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWILIGHT LAND ***




Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer





TWILIGHT LAND

By Howard Pyle




Table of Contents

     Introduction
     The Stool of Fortune
     The Talisman of Solomon
     Ill-Luck and the Fiddler
     Empty Bottles
     Good Gifts and a Fool’s Folly
     The Good of a Few Words
     Woman’s Wit
     A Piece of Good Luck
     The Fruit of Happiness
     Not a Pin to Choose
     Much Shall Have More and Little Shall Have Less
     Wisdom’s Wages and Folly’s Pay
     The Enchanted Island
     All Things are as Fate Wills
     Where to Lay the Blame
     The Salt of Life




Introduction

I found myself in Twilight Land. How I ever got there I cannot tell, but
there I was in Twilight Land.

What is Twilight Land? It is a wonderful, wonderful place where no sun
shines to scorch your back as you jog along the way, where no rain falls
to make the road muddy and hard to travel, where no wind blows the dust
into your eyes or the chill into your marrow. Where all is sweet and
quiet and ready to go to bed.

Where is Twilight Land? Ah! that I cannot tell you. You will either have
to ask your mother or find it for yourself.

There I was in Twilight Land. The birds were singing their good-night
song, and the little frogs were piping “peet, peet.” The sky overhead
was full of still brightness, and the moon in the east hung in the
purple gray like a great bubble as yellow as gold. All the air was full
of the smell of growing things. The high-road was gray, and the trees
were dark.

I drifted along the road as a soap-bubble floats before the wind, or as
a body floats in a dream. I floated along and I floated along past the
trees, past the bushes, past the mill-pond, past the mill where the old
miller stood at the door looking at me.

I floated on, and there was the Inn, and it was the Sign of Mother
Goose.

The sign hung on a pole, and on it was painted a picture of Mother Goose
with her gray gander.

It was to the Inn I wished to come.

I floated on, and I would have floated past the Inn, and perhaps have
gotten into the Land of Never-Come-Back-Again, only I caught at
the branch of an apple-tree, and so I stopped myself, though the
apple-blossoms came falling down like pink and white snowflakes.

The earth and the air and the sky were all still, just as it is at
twilight, and I heard them laughing and talking in the tap-room of
the Inn of the Sign of Mother Goose--the clinking of glasses, and the
rattling and clatter of knives and forks and plates and dishes. That was
where I wished to go.

So in I went. Mother Goose herself opened the door, and there I was.

The room was all full of twilight; but there they sat, every one of
them. I did not count them, but there were ever so many: Aladdin, and
Ali Baba, and Fortunatis, and Jack-the-Giant-Killer, and Doctor Faustus,
and Bidpai, and Cinderella, and Patient Grizzle, and the Soldier who
cheated the Devil, and St. George, and Hans in Luck, who traded and
traded his lump of gold until he had only an empty churn to show for it;
and there was Sindbad the Sailor, and the Tailor who killed seven flies
at a blow, and the Fisherman who fished up the Genie, and the Lad who
fiddled for the Jew in the bramble-bush, and the Blacksmith who made
Death sit in his apple-tree, and Boots, who always marries the Princess,
whether he wants to or not--a rag-tag lot as ever you saw in your life,
gathered from every place, and brought together in Twilight Land.

Each one of them was telling a story, and now it was the turn of the
Soldier who cheated the Devil.

“I will tell you,” said the Soldier who cheated the Devil, “a story of a
friend of mine.”

“Take a fresh pipe of tobacco,” said St. George.

“Thank you, I will,” said the Soldier who cheated the Devil.

He filled his long pipe full of tobacco, and then he tilted it upside
down and sucked in the light of the candle.

Puff! puff! puff! and a cloud of smoke went up about his head, so that
you could just see his red nose shining through it, and his bright eyes
twinkling in the midst of the smoke-wreath, like two stars through a
thin cloud on a summer night.

“I’ll tell you,” said the Soldier who cheated the Devil, “the story of
a friend of mine. Tis every word of it just as true as that I myself
cheated the Devil.”

He took a drink from his mug of beer, and then he began.

“Tis called,” said he--




The Stool of Fortune

Once upon a time there came a soldier marching along the road, kicking
up a little cloud of dust at each step--as strapping and merry and
bright-eyed a fellow as you would wish to see in a summer day. Tramp!
tramp! tramp! he marched, whistling as he jogged along, though he
carried a heavy musket over his shoulder and though the sun shone hot
and strong and there was never a tree in sight to give him a bit of
shelter.

At last he came in sight of the King’s Town and to a great field of
stocks and stones, and there sat a little old man as withered and brown
as a dead leaf, and clad all in scarlet from head to foot.

“Ho! soldier,” said he, “are you a good shot?”

“Aye,” said the soldier, “that is my trade.”

“Would you like to earn a dollar by shooting off your musket for me?”

“Aye,” said the soldier, “that is my trade also.”

“Very well, then,” said the little man in red, “here is a silver button
to drop into your gun instead of a bullet. Wait you here, and about
sunset there will come a great black bird flying. In one claw it carries
a feather cap and in the other a round stone. Shoot me the silver button
at that bird, and if your aim is good it will drop the feather cap and
the pebble. Bring them to me to the great town-gate and I will pay you a
dollar for your trouble.”

“Very well,” said the soldier, “shooting my gun is a job that fits me
like an old coat.” So, down he sat and the old man went his way.

Well, there he sat and sat and sat and sat until the sun touched the rim
of the ground, and then, just as the old man said, there came flying a
great black bird as silent as night. The soldier did not tarry to look
or to think. As the bird flew by up came the gun to his shoulder, squint
went his eye along the barrel--Puff! bang--!

I vow and declare that if the shot he fired had cracked the sky he
could not have been more frightened. The great black bird gave a yell so
terrible that it curdled the very blood in his veins and made his hair
stand upon end. Away it flew like a flash--a bird no longer, but a
great, black demon, smoking and smelling most horribly of brimstone,
and when the soldier gathered his wits, there lay the feather cap and a
little, round, black stone upon the ground.

“Well,” said the soldier, “it is little wonder that the old man had
no liking to shoot at such game as that.” And thereupon he popped
the feather cap into one pocket and the round stone into another, and
shouldering his musket marched away until he reached the town-gate, and
there was the old man waiting for him.

“Did you shoot the bird?” said he.

“I did,” said the soldier.

“And did you get the cap and the round stone?”

“I did.”

“Then here is your dollar.”

“Wait a bit,” said the soldier, “I shot greater game that time than
I bargained for, and so it’s ten dollars and not one you shall pay me
before you lay finger upon the feather cap and the little stone.”

“Very well,” said the old man, “here are ten dollars.”

“Ho! ho!” thought the soldier, “is that the way the wind blows?”--“Did I
say ten dollars?” said he; “twas a hundred dollars I meant.”

At that the old man frowned until his eyes shone green. “Very well,”
 said he, “if it is a hundred dollars you want, you will have to come
home with me, for I have not so much with me.” Thereupon he entered the
town with the soldier at his heels.

Up one street he went and down another, until at last he came to a
great, black, ancient ramshackle house; and that was where he lived. In
he walked without so much as a rap at the door, and so led the way to
a great room with furnaces and books and bottles and jars and dust and
cobwebs, and three grinning skulls upon the mantelpiece, each with a
candle stuck atop of it, and there he left the soldier while he went to
get the hundred dollars.

The soldier sat him down upon a three-legged stool in the corner and
began staring about him; and he liked the looks of the place as little
as any he had seen in all of his life, for it smelled musty and dusty,
it did: the three skulls grinned at him, and he began to think that the
little old man was no better than he should be. “I wish,” says he, at
last, “that instead of being here I might be well out of my scrape and
in a safe place.”

Now the little old man in scarlet was a great magician, and there was
little or nothing in that house that had not some magic about it, and of
all things the three-legged stool had been conjured the most.

“I wish that instead of being here I might be well out of my scrape,
and in a safe place.” That was what the soldier said; and hardly had the
words left his lips when--whisk! whir!--away flew the stool through the
window, so suddenly that the soldier had only just time enough to gripe
it tight by the legs to save himself from falling. Whir! whiz!--away it
flew like a bullet. Up and up it went--so high in the air that the earth
below looked like a black blanket spread out in the night; and then down
it came again, with the soldier still griping tight to the legs, until
at last it settled as light as a feather upon a balcony of the king’s
palace; and when the soldier caught his wind again he found himself
without a hat, and with hardly any wits in his head.

There he sat upon the stool for a long time without daring to move, for
he did not know what might happen to him next. There he sat and sat, and
by-and-by his ears got cold in the night air, and then he noticed for
the first time that he had lost his head gear, and bethought himself of
the feather cap in his pocket. So out he drew it and clapped it upon his
head, and then--lo and behold!--he found he had become as invisible as
thin air--not a shred or a hair of him could be seen. “Well!” said he,
“here is another wonder, but I am safe now at any rate.” And up he got
to find some place not so cool as where he sat.

He stepped in at an open window, and there he found himself in a
beautiful room, hung with cloth of silver and blue, and with chairs and
tables of white and gold; dozens and scores of waxlights shone like so
many stars, and lit every crack and cranny as bright as day, and there
at one end of the room upon a couch, with her eyelids closed and fast
asleep, lay the prettiest princess that ever the sun shone upon. The
soldier stood and looked and looked at her, and looked and looked at
her, until his heart melted within him like soft butter, and then he
kissed her.

“Who is that?” said the princess, starting up, wide-awake, but not a
soul could she see, because the soldier had the feather cap upon his
head.

“It is I,” said he, “and I am King of the Wind, and ten times greater
than the greatest of kings here below. One day I saw you walking in your
garden and fell in love with you, and now I have come to ask you if you
will marry me and be my wife?”

“But how can I marry you?” said the princess, “without seeing you?”

“You shall see me,” said the soldier, “all in good time. Three days
from now I will come again, and will show myself to you, but just now it
cannot be. But if I come, will you marry me?”

“Yes I will,” said the princess, “for I like the way you talk--that I
do!”

Thereupon the soldier kissed her and said good-bye, and then stepped
out of the window as he had stepped in. He sat him down upon his
three-legged stool. “I wish,” said he, “to be carried to such and such a
tavern.” For he had been in that town before, and knew the places where
good living was to be had.

Whir! whiz! away flew the stool as high and higher than it had flown
before, and then down it came again, and down and down until it lit as
light as a feather in the street before the tavern door. The soldier
tucked his feather cap in his pocket, and the three-legged stool under
his arm, and in he went and ordered a pot of beer and some white bread
and cheese.

Meantime, at the king’s palace was such a gossiping and such a hubbub as
had not been heard there for many a day; for the pretty princess was not
slow in telling how the invisible King of the Wind had come and asked
her to marry him; and some said it was true and some said it was not
true, and everybody wondered and talked, and told their own notions of
the matter. But all agreed that three days would show whether what had
been told was true or no.

As for the soldier, he knew no more how to do what he had promised to do
than my grandmother’s cat; for where was he to get clothes fine enough
for the King of the Wind to wear? So there he sat on his three-legged
stool thinking and thinking, and if he had known all that I know he
would not have given two turns of his wit upon it. “I wish,” says he, at
last--“I wish that this stool could help me now as well as it can carry
me through the sky. I wish,” says he, “that I had a suit of clothes such
as the King of the Wind might really wear.”

The wonders of the three-legged stool were wonders indeed!

Hardly had the words left the soldier’s lips when down came something
tumbling about his ears from up in the air; and what should it be but
just such a suit of clothes as he had in his mind--all crusted over with
gold and silver and jewels.

“Well,” says the soldier, as soon as he had got over his wonder again,
“I would rather sit upon this stool than any I ever saw.” And so would
I, if I had been in his place, and had a few minutes to think of all
that I wanted.

So he found out the trick of the stool, and after that wishing and
having were easy enough, and by the time the three days were ended the
real King of the Wind himself could not have cut a finer figure. Then
down sat the soldier upon his stool, and wished himself at the king’s
palace. Away he flew through the air, and by-and-by there he was, just
where he had been before. He put his feather cap upon his head, and
stepped in through the window, and there he found the princess with her
father, the king, and her mother, the queen, and all the great lords and
nobles waiting for his coming; but never a stitch nor a hair did they
see of him until he stood in the very midst of them all. Then he whipped
the feather cap off of his head, and there he was, shining with silver
and gold and glistening with jewels--such a sight as man’s eyes never
saw before.

“Take her,” said the king, “she is yours.” And the soldier looked so
handsome in his fine clothes that the princess was as glad to hear those
words as any she had ever listened to in all of her life.

“You shall,” said the king, “be married to-morrow.”

“Very well,” said the soldier. “Only give me a plot of ground to build
a palace upon that shall be fit for the wife of the King of the Wind to
live in.”

“You shall have it,” said the king, “and it shall be the great parade
ground back of the palace, which is so wide and long that all my army
can march round and round in it without getting into its own way; and
that ought to be big enough.”

“Yes,” said the soldier, “it is.” Thereupon he put on his feather cap
and disappeared from the sight of all as quickly as one might snuff out
a candle.

He mounted his three-legged stool and away he flew through the air until
he had come again to the tavern where he was lodging. There he sat him
down and began to churn his thoughts, and the butter he made was worth
the having, I can tell you. He wished for a grand palace of white
marble, and then he wished for all sorts of things to fill it--the
finest that could be had. Then he wished for servants in clothes of gold
and silver, and then he wished for fine horses and gilded coaches.
Then he wished for gardens and orchards and lawns and flower-plats and
fountains, and all kinds and sorts of things, until the sweat ran down
his face from hard thinking and wishing. And as he thought and wished,
all the things he thought and wished for grew up like soap-bubbles from
nothing at all.

Then, when day began to break, he wished himself with his fine clothes
to be in the palace that his own wits had made, and away he flew through
the air until he had come there safe and sound.

But when the sun rose and shone down upon the beautiful palace and all
the gardens and orchards around it, the king and queen and all the court
stood dumb with wonder at the sight. Then, as they stood staring, the
gates opened and out came the soldier riding in his gilded coach with
his servants in silver and gold marching beside him, and such a sight
the daylight never looked upon before that day.

Well, the princess and the soldier were married, and if no couple had
ever been happy in the world before, they were then. Nothing was heard
but feasting and merrymaking, and at night all the sky was lit with
fireworks. Such a wedding had never been before, and all the world was
glad that it had happened.

That is, all the world but one; that one was the old man dressed in
scarlet that the soldier had met when he first came to town. While all
the rest were in the hubbub of rejoicing, he put on his thinking-cap,
and by-and-by began to see pretty well how things lay, and that, as they
say in our town, there was a fly in the milk-jug. “Ho, ho!” thought he,
“so the soldier has found out all about the three-legged stool, has he?
Well, I will just put a spoke into his wheel for him.” And so he began
to watch for his chance to do the soldier an ill turn.

Now, a week or two after the wedding, and after all the gay doings had
ended, a grand hunt was declared, and the king and his new son-in-law
and all the court went to it. That was just such a chance as the old
magician had been waiting for; so the night before the hunting-party
returned he climbed the walls of the garden, and so came to the
wonderful palace that the soldier had built out of nothing at all, and
there stood three men keeping guard so that no one might enter.

But little that troubled the magician. He began to mutter spells and
strange words, and all of a sudden he was gone, and in his place was
a great black ant, for he had changed himself into an ant. In he ran
through a crack of the door (and mischief has got into many a man’s
house through a smaller hole for the matter of that). In and out ran the
ant through one room and another, and up and down and here and there,
until at last in a far-away part of the magic palace he found the
three-legged stool, and if I had been in the soldier’s place I would
have chopped it up into kindling-wood after I had gotten all that I
wanted. But there it was, and in an instant the magician resumed his
own shape. Down he sat him upon the stool. “I wish,” said he, “that this
palace and the princess and all who are within it, together with its
orchards and its lawns and its gardens and everything, may be removed to
such and such a country, upon the other side of the earth.”

And as the stool had obeyed the soldier, so everything was done now just
as the magician said.

The next morning back came the hunting-party, and as they rode over the
hill--lo and behold!--there lay stretched out the great parade ground
in which the king’s armies used to march around and around, and the land
was as bare as the palm of my hand. Not a stick or a stone of the palace
was left; not a leaf or a blade of the orchards or gardens was to be
seen.

The soldier sat as dumb as a fish, and the king stared with eyes and
mouth wide open. “Where is the palace, and where is my daughter?” said
he, at last, finding words and wit.

“I do not know,” said the soldier.

The king’s face grew as black as thunder. “You do not know?” he said,
“then you must find out. Seize the traitor!” he cried.

But that was easier said than done, for, quick as a wink, as they came
to lay hold of him, the soldier whisked the feather cap from his pocket
and clapped it upon his head, and then they might as well have hoped to
find the south wind in winter as to find him.

But though he got safe away from that trouble he was deep enough in the
dumps, you may be sure of that. Away he went, out into the wide world,
leaving that town behind him. Away he went, until by-and-by he came to
a great forest, and for three days he travelled on and on--he knew not
whither. On the third night, as he sat beside a fire which he had built
to keep him warm, he suddenly bethought himself of the little round
stone which had dropped from the bird’s claw, and which he still had in
his pocket. “Why should it not also help me,” said he, “for there must
be some wonder about it.” So he brought it out, and sat looking at it
and looking at it, but he could make nothing of it for the life of him.
Nevertheless, it might have some wishing power about it, like the
magic stool. “I wish,” said the soldier, “that I might get out of this
scrape.” That is what we have all wished many and many a time in a like
case; but just now it did the soldier no more good to wish than it does
good for the rest of us. “Bah!” said he, “it is nothing but a black
stone after all.” And then he threw it into the fire.

Puff! Bang! Away flew the embers upon every side, and back tumbled the
soldier, and there in the middle of the flame stood just such a grim,
black being as he had one time shot at with the silver button.

As for the poor soldier, he just lay flat on his back and stared with
eyes like saucers, for he thought that his end had come for sure.

“What are my lord’s commands?” said the being, in a voice that shook the
marrow of the soldier’s bones.

“Who are you?” said the soldier.

“I am the spirit of the stone,” said the being. “You have heated it in
the flame, and I am here. Whatever you command I must obey.”

“Say you so?” cried the soldier, scrambling to his feet. “Very well,
then, just carry me to where I may find my wife and my palace again.”

Without a word the spirit of the stone snatched the soldier up, and
flew away with him swifter than the wind. Over forest, over field, over
mountain and over valley he flew, until at last, just at the crack of
day, he set him down in front of his own palace gate in the far country
where the magician had transported it.

After that the soldier knew his way quickly enough. He clapped his
feather cap upon his head and into the palace he went, and from one room
to another, until at last he came to where the princess sat weeping and
wailing, with her pretty eyes red from long crying.

Then the soldier took off his cap again, and you may guess what sounds
of rejoicing followed. They sat down beside one another, and after the
soldier had eaten, the princess told him all that had happened to her;
how the magician had found the stool, and how he had transported the
palace to this far-away land; how he came every day and begged her to
marry him--which she would rather die than do.

To all this the soldier listened, and when she had ended her story he
bade her to dry her tears, for, after all, the jug was only cracked,
and not past mending. Then he told her that when the sorcerer came again
that day she should say so and so and so and so, and that he would be by
to help her with his feather cap upon his head.

After that they sat talking together as happy as two turtle-doves,
until the magician’s foot was heard on the stairs. And then the soldier
clapped his feather cap upon his head just as the door opened.

“Snuff, snuff!” said the magician, sniffing the air, “here is a smell of
Christian blood.”

“Yes,” said the princess, “that is so; there came a peddler to-day, but
after all he did not stay long.”

“He’d better not come again,” said the magician, “or it will be the
worse for him. But tell me, will you marry me?”

“No,” said the princess, “I shall not marry you until you can prove
yourself to be a greater man than my husband.”

“Pooh!” said the magician, “that will be easy enough to prove; tell me
how you would have me do so and I will do it.”

“Very well,” said the princess, “then let me see you change yourself
into a lion. If you can do that I may perhaps believe you to be as great
as my husband.”

“It shall,” said the magician, “be as you say. He began to mutter spells
and strange words, and then all of a sudden he was gone, and in his
place there stood a lion with bristling mane and flaming eyes--a sight
fit of itself to kill a body with terror.

“That will do!” cried the princess, quaking and trembling at the sight,
and thereupon the magician took his own shape again.

“Now,” said he, “do you believe that I am as great as the poor soldier?”

“Not yet,” said the princess; “I have seen how big you can make
yourself, now I wish to see how little you can become. Let me see you
change yourself into a mouse.”

“So be it,” said the magician, and began again to mutter his spells.
Then all of a sudden he was gone just as he was gone before, and in his
place was a little mouse sitting up and looking at the princess with a
pair of eyes like glass beads.

But he did not sit there long. This was what the soldier had planned
for, and all the while he had been standing by with his feather hat upon
his head. Up he raised his foot, and down he set it upon the mouse.

Crunch!--that was an end of the magician.

After that all was clear sailing; the soldier hunted up the three-legged
stool and down he sat upon it, and by dint of no more than just a little
wishing, back flew palace and garden and all through the air again to
the place whence it came.

I do not know whether the old king ever believed again that his
son-in-law was the King of the Wind; anyhow, all was peace and
friendliness thereafter, for when a body can sit upon a three-legged
stool and wish to such good purpose as the soldier wished, a body is
just as good as a king, and a good deal better, to my mind.

The Soldier who cheated the Devil looked into his pipe; it was nearly
out. He puffed and puffed and the coal glowed brighter, and fresh clouds
of smoke rolled up into the air. Little Brown Betty came and refilled,
from a crock of brown foaming ale, the mug which he had emptied. The
Soldier who had cheated the Devil looked up at her and winked one eye.

“Now,” said St. George, “it is the turn of yonder old man,” and he
pointed, as he spoke, with the stem of his pipe towards old Bidpai, who
sat with closed eyes meditating inside of himself.

The old man opened his eyes, the whites of which were as yellow as
saffron, and wrinkled his face into innumerable cracks and lines. Then
he closed his eyes again; then he opened them again; then he cleared
his throat and began: “There was once upon a time a man whom other men
called Aben Hassen the Wise--”

“One moment,” said Ali Baba; “will you not tell us what the story is
about?”

Old Bidpai looked at him and stroked his long white beard. “It is,” said
he, “about--”




The Talisman of Solomon

There was once upon a time a man whom other men called Aben Hassen
the Wise. He had read a thousand books of magic, and knew all that the
ancients or moderns had to tell of the hidden arts.

The King of the Demons of the Earth, a great and hideous monster,
named Zadok, was his servant, and came and went as Aben Hassen the Wise
ordered, and did as he bade. After Aben Hassen learned all that it was
possible for man to know, he said to himself, “Now I will take my ease
and enjoy my life.” So he called the Demon Zadok to him, and said to the
monster, “I have read in my books that there is a treasure that was one
time hidden by the ancient kings of Egypt--a treasure such as the eyes
of man never saw before or since their day. Is that true?”

“It is true,” said the Demon.

“Then I command thee to take me to that treasure and to show it to me,”
 said Aben Hassen the Wise.

“It shall be done,” said the Demon; and thereupon he caught up the Wise
Man and transported him across mountain and valley, across land and
sea, until he brought him to a country known as the “Land of the Black
Isles,” where the treasure of the ancient kings was hidden. The Demon
showed the Magician the treasure, and it was a sight such as man had
never looked upon before or since the days that the dark, ancient ones
hid it. With his treasure Aben Hassen built himself palaces and gardens
and paradises such as the world never saw before. He lived like an
emperor, and the fame of his doings rang through all the four corners of
the earth.

Now the queen of the Black Isles was the most beautiful woman in the
world, but she was as cruel and wicked and cunning as she was beautiful.
No man that looked upon her could help loving her; for not only was
she as beautiful as a dream, but her beauty was of that sort that it
bewitched a man in spite of himself.

One day the queen sent for Aben Hassen the Wise. “Tell me,” said she,
“is it true that men say of you that you have discovered a hidden
treasure such as the world never saw before?” And she looked at Aben
Hassen so that his wisdom all crumbled away like sand, and he became
just as foolish as other men.

“Yes,” said he, “it is true.”

Aben Hassen the Wise spent all that day with the queen, and when he left
the palace he was like a man drunk and dizzy with love. Moreover, he had
promised to show the queen the hidden treasure the next day.

As Aben Hassen, like a man in a dream, walked towards his own house, he
met an old man standing at the corner of the street. The old man had a
talisman that hung dangling from a chain, and which he offered for sale.
When Aben Hassen saw the talisman he knew very well what it was--that
it was the famous talisman of King Solomon the Wise. If he who possessed
the talisman asked it to speak, it would tell that man both what to do
and what not to do.

The Wise Man bought the talisman for three pieces of silver (and wisdom
has been sold for less than that many a time), and as soon as he had the
talisman in his hands he hurried home with it and locked himself in a
room.

“Tell me,” said the Wise Man to the Talisman, “shall I marry the
beautiful queen of the Black Isles?”

“Fly, while there is yet time to escape!” said the Talisman; “but go not
near the queen again, for she seeks to destroy thy life.”

“But tell me, O Talisman!” said the Wise Man, “what then shall I do with
all that vast treasure of the kings of Egypt?”

“Fly from it while there is yet chance to escape!” said the Talisman;
“but go not into the treasure-house again, for in the farther door,
where thou hast not yet looked, is that which will destroy him who
possesses the treasure.”

“But Zadok,” said Aben Hassen; “what of Zadok?”

“Fly from the monster while there is yet time to escape,” said the
Talisman, “and have no more to do with thy Demon slave, for already he
is weaving a net of death and destruction about thy feet.”

The Wise Man sat all that night pondering and thinking upon what the
Talisman had said. When morning came he washed and dressed himself, and
called the Demon Zadok to him. “Zadok,” said he, “carry me to the palace
of the queen.” In the twinkling of an eye the Demon transported him to
the steps of the palace.

“Zadok,” said the Wise Man, “give me the staff of life and death;” and
the Demon brought from under his clothes a wand, one-half of which was
of silver and one-half of which was of gold. The Wise Man touched the
steps of the palace with the silver end of the staff. Instantly all
the sound and hum of life was hushed. The thread of life was cut by the
knife of silence, and in a moment all was as still as death.

“Zadok,” said the Wise Man, “transport me to the treasure-house of the
king of Egypt.” And instantly the Demon had transported him thither. The
Wise Man drew a circle upon the earth. “No one,” said he, “shall have
power to enter here but the master of Zadok, the King of the Demons of
the Earth.”

“And now, Zadok,” said he, “I command thee to transport me to India,
and as far from here as thou canst.” Instantly the Demon did as he
was commanded; and of all the treasure that he had, the Wise Man took
nothing with him but a jar of golden money and a jar of silver money.
As soon as the Wise Man stood upon the ground of India, he drew from
beneath his robe a little jar of glass.

“Zadok,” said he, “I command thee to enter this jar.”

Then the Demon knew that now his turn had come. He besought and implored
the Wise Man to have mercy upon him; but it was all in vain. Then the
Demon roared and bellowed till the earth shook and the sky grew dark
overhead. But all was of no avail; into the jar he must go, and into the
jar he went. Then the Wise Man stoppered the jar and sealed it. He wrote
an inscription of warning upon it, and then he buried it in the ground.

“Now,” said Aben Hassen the Wise to the Talisman of Solomon, “have I
done everything that I should?”

“No,” said the Talisman, “thou shouldst not have brought the jar of
golden money and the jar of silver money with thee; for that which is
evil in the greatest is evil in the least. Thou fool! The treasure is
cursed! Cast it all from thee while there is yet time.”

“Yes, I will do that, too,” said the Wise Man. So he buried in the earth
the jar of gold and the jar of silver that he had brought with him, and
then he stamped the mould down upon it. After that the Wise Man began
his life all over again. He bought, and he sold, and he traded, and
by-and-by he became rich. Then he built himself a great house, and in
the foundation he laid the jar in which the Demon was bottled.

Then he married a young and handsome wife. By-and-by the wife bore him a
son, and then she died.

This son was the pride of his father’s heart; but he was as vain and
foolish as his father was wise, so that all men called him Aben Hassen
the Fool, as they called the father Aben Hassen the Wise.

Then one day death came and called the old man, and he left his son all
that belonged to him--even the Talisman of Solomon.

Young Aben Hassen the Fool had never seen so much money as now belonged
to him. It seemed to him that there was nothing in the world he could
not enjoy. He found friends by the dozens and scores, and everybody
seemed to be very fond of him.

He asked no questions of the Talisman of Solomon, for to his mind there
was no need of being both wise and rich. So he began enjoying himself
with his new friends. Day and night there was feasting and drinking and
singing and dancing and merrymaking and carousing; and the money that
the old man had made by trading and wise living poured out like water
through a sieve.

Then, one day came an end to all this junketing, and nothing remained to
the young spend-thrift of all the wealth that his father had left him.
Then the officers of the law came down upon him and seized all that was
left of the fine things, and his fair-weather friends flew away from his
troubles like flies from vinegar. Then the young man began to think of
the Talisman of Wisdom. For it was with him as it is with so many of
us: When folly has emptied the platter, wisdom is called in to pick the
bones.

“Tell me,” said the young man to the Talisman of Solomon, “what shall I
do, now that everything is gone?”

“Go,” said the Talisman of Solomon, “and work as thy father has worked
before thee. Advise with me and become prosperous and contended, but do
not go dig under the cherry-tree in the garden.”

“Why should I not dig under the cherry-tree in the garden?” says the
young man; “I will see what is there, at any rate.”

So he straightway took a spade and went out into the garden, where the
Talisman had told him not to go. He dug and dug under the cherry-tree,
and by-and-by his spade struck something hard. It was a vessel of brass,
and it was full of silver money. Upon the lid of the vessel were these
words, engraved in the handwriting of the old man who had died:

“My son, this vessel full of silver has been brought from the
treasure-house of the ancient kings of Egypt. Take this, then, that thou
findest; advise with the talisman; be wise and prosper.”

“And they call that the Talisman of Wisdom,” said the young man. “If I
had listened to it I never would have found this treasure.”

The next day he began to spend the money he had found, and his friends
soon gathered around him again.

The vessel of silver money lasted a week, and then it was all gone; not
a single piece was left.

Then the young man bethought himself again of the Talisman of Solomon.
“What shall I do now,” said he, “to save myself from ruin?”

“Earn thy bread with honest labor,” said the Talisman, “and I will teach
thee how to prosper; but do not dig beneath the fig-tree that stands by
the fountain in the garden.”

The young man did not tarry long after he heard what the Talisman had
said. He seized a spade and hurried away to the fig-tree in the garden
as fast as he could run. He dug and dug, and by-and-by his spade struck
something hard. It was a copper vessel, and it was filled with gold
money. Upon the lid of the vessel was engraved these words in the
handwriting of the old man who had gone: “My son, my son,” they said,
“thou hast been warned once; be warned again. The gold money in this
vessel has been brought from the treasure-house of the ancient kings
of Egypt. Take it; be advised by the Talisman of Solomon; be wise and
prosper.”

“And to think that if I had listened to the Talisman, I would never have
found this,” said the young man.

The gold in the vessel lasted maybe for a month of jollity and
merrymaking, but at the end of that time there was nothing left--not a
copper farthing.

“Tell me,” said the young man to the Talisman, “what shall I do now?”

“Thou fool,” said the Talisman, “go sweat and toil, but do not go down
into the vault beneath this house. There in the vault is a red stone
built into the wall. The red stone turns upon a pivot. Behind the stone
is a hollow space. As thou wouldst save thy life from peril, go not near
it!”

“Hear that now,” says the young man, “first, this Talisman told me not
to go, and I found silver. Then it told me not to go, and I found gold;
now it tells me not to go--perhaps I shall find precious stones enough
for a king’s ransom.”

He lit a lantern and went down into the vault beneath the house. There,
as the Talisman had said, was the red stone built into the wall. He
pressed the stone, and it turned upon its pivot as the Talisman had said
it would turn. Within was a hollow space, as the Talisman said there
would be. In the hollow space there was a casket of silver. The young
man snatched it up, and his hands trembled for joy.

Upon the lid of the box were these words in the father’s handwriting,
written in letters as red as blood: “Fool, fool! Thou hast been a fool
once, thou hast been a fool twice; be not a fool for a third time.
Restore this casket whence it was taken, and depart.”

“I will see what is in the box, at any rate,” said the young man.

He opened it. There was nothing in it but a hollow glass jar the size of
an egg. The young man took the jar from the box; it was as hot as fire.
He cried out and let it fall. The jar burst upon the floor with a crack
of thunder; the house shook and rocked, and the dust flew about in
clouds. Then all was still; and when Aben Hassen the Fool could see
through the cloud of terror that enveloped him he beheld a great, tall,
hideous being as black as ink, and with eyes that shone like coals of
fire.

When the young man saw that terrible creature his tongue clave to
the roof of his mouth, and his knees smote together with fear, for he
thought that his end had now certainly come.

“Who are you?” he croaked, as soon as he could find his voice.

“I am the King of the Demons of the Earth, and my name is Zadok,”
 answered the being. “I was once thy father’s slave, and now I am thine,
thou being his son. When thou speakest I must obey, and whatever thou
commandest me to do that I must do.”

“For instance, what can you do for me?” said the young man.

“I can do whatsoever you ask me; I can make you rich.”

“You can make me rich?”

“Yes, I can make you richer than a king.”

“Then make me rich as soon as you can,” said Aben Hassen the Fool, “and
that is all that I shall ask of you now.”

“It shall be done,” said the Demon; “spend all that thou canst spend,
and thou shalt always have more. Has my lord any further commands for
his slave?”

“No,” said the young man, “there is nothing more; you may go now.”

And thereupon the Demon vanished like a flash.

“And to think,” said the young man, as he came up out of the vault--“and
to think that all this I should never have found if I had obeyed the
Talisman.”

Such riches were never seen in that land as the young man now possessed.
There was no end to the treasure that poured in upon him. He lived like
an emperor. He built a palace more splendid than the palace of the king.
He laid out vast gardens of the most exquisite beauty, in which there
were fountains as white as snow, trees of rare fruit and flowers that
filled all the air with their perfume, summer-houses of alabaster and
ebony.

Every one who visited him was received like a prince, entertained like a
king, given a present fit for an emperor, and sent away happy. The fame
of all these things went out through all the land, and every one talked
of him and the magnificence that surrounded him.

It came at last to the ears of the king himself, and one day he said
to his minister, “Let us go and see with our own eyes if all the things
reported of this merchant’s son are true.”

So the king and his minister disguised themselves as foreign merchants,
and went that evening to the palace where the young man lived. A servant
dressed in clothes of gold and silver cloth stood at the door, and
called to them to come in and be made welcome. He led them in, and to a
chamber lit with perfumed lamps of gold. Then six black slaves took them
in charge and led them to a bath of white marble. They were bathed in
perfumed water and dried with towels of fine linen. When they came
forth they were clad in clothes of cloth of silver, stiff with gold and
jewels. Then twelve handsome white slaves led them through a vast and
splendid hall to a banqueting-room.

When they entered they were deafened with the noise of carousing and
merrymaking.

Aben Hassen the Fool sat at the head of the table upon a throne of
gold, with a canopy of gold above his head. When he saw the king and
the minister enter, he beckoned to them to come and sit beside him.
He showed them special favor because they were strangers, and special
servants waited upon them.

The king and his minister had never seen anything like what they then
saw. They could hardly believe it was not all magic and enchantment.
At the end of the feast each of the guests was given a present of great
value, and was sent away rejoicing. The king received a pearl as big as
a marble; the minister a cup of wrought gold.

The next morning the king and the prime-minister were talking over what
they had seen. “Sire,” said the prime-minister, “I have no doubt but
that the young man has discovered some vast hidden treasure. Now,
according to the laws of this kingdom, the half of any treasure that is
discovered shall belong to the king’s treasury. If I were in your place
I would send for this young man and compel him to tell me whence comes
all this vast wealth.”

“That is true,” said the king; “I had not thought of that before. The
young man shall tell me all about it.”

So they sent a royal guard and brought the young man to the king’s
palace. When the young man saw in the king and the prime-minister his
guests of the night before, whom he had thought to be only foreign
merchants, he fell on his face and kissed the ground before the throne.
But the king spoke to him kindly, and raised him up and sat him on the
seat beside him. They talked for a while concerning different things,
and then the king said at last, “Tell me, my friend, whence comes all
the inestimable wealth that you must possess to allow you to live as you
do?”

“Sire,” said the young man, “I cannot tell you whence it comes. I can
only tell you that it is given to me.”

The king frowned. “You cannot tell,” said he; “you must tell. It is for
that that I have sent for you, and you must tell me.”

Then the young man began to be frightened. “I beseech you,” said he, “do
not ask me whence it comes. I cannot tell you.”

Then the king’s brows grew as black as thunder. “What!” cried he, “do
you dare to bandy words with me? I know that you have discovered some
treasure. Tell me upon the instant where it is; for the half of it, by
the laws of the land, belongs to me, and I will have it.”

At the king’s words Aben Hassen the Fool fell on his knees. “Sire,”
 said he, “I will tell you all the truth. There is a demon named Zadok--a
monster as black as a coal. He is my slave, and it is he that brings me
all the treasure that I enjoy.” The king thought nothing else than that
Aben Hassen the Fool was trying to deceive him. He laughed; he was
very angry. “What,” cried he, “do you amuse me by such an absurd and
unbelievable tale? Now I am more than ever sure that you have discovered
a treasure and that you wish to keep the knowledge of it from me,
knowing, as you do, that the one-half of it by law belongs to me. Take
him away!” cried he to his attendants. “Give him fifty lashes, and throw
him into prison. He shall stay there and have fifty lashes every day
until he tells me where his wealth is hidden.”

It was done as the king said, and by-and-by Aben Hassen the Fool lay in
the prison, smarting and sore with the whipping he had had.

Then he began again to think of the Talisman of Solomon.

“Tell me,” said he to the Talisman, “What shall I do now to help myself
in this trouble?”

“Bear thy punishment, thou fool,” said the Talisman. “Know that the king
will by-and-by pardon thee and will let thee go. In the meantime bear
thy punishment; perhaps it will cure thee of thy folly. Only do not call
upon Zadok, the King of the Demons, in this thy trouble.”

The young man smote his hand upon his head. “What a fool I am,” said
he, “not to have thought to call upon Zadok before this!” Then he called
aloud, “Zadok, Zadok! If thou art indeed my slave, come hither at my
bidding.”

In an instant there sounded a rumble as of thunder. The floor swayed and
rocked beneath the young man’s feet. The dust flew in clouds, and there
stood Zadok as black as ink, and with eyes that shone like coals of
fire.

“I have come,” said Zadok, “and first let me cure thy smarts, O master.”

He removed the cloths from the young man’s back, and rubbed the places
that smarted with a cooling unguent. Instantly the pain and smarting
ceased, and the merchant’s son had perfect ease.

“Now,” said Zadok, “what is thy bidding?”

“Tell me,” said Aben Hassen the Fool, “whence comes all the wealth that
you have brought me? The king has commanded me to tell him and I could
not, and so he has had me beaten with fifty lashes.”

“I bring the treasure,” said Zadok, “from the treasure-house of the
ancient kings of Egypt. That treasure I at one time discovered to your
father, and he, not desiring it himself, hid it in the earth so that no
one might find it.”

“And where is this treasure-house, O Zadok?” said the young man.

“It is in the city of the queen of the Black Isles,” said the King of
the Demons; “there thy father lived in a palace of such magnificence
as thou hast never dreamed of. It was I that brought him thence to this
place with one vessel of gold money and one vessel of silver money.”

“It was you who brought him here, did you say, Zadok? Then, tell me,
can you take me from here to the city of the queen of the Black Isles,
whence you brought him?”

“Yes,” said Zadok, “with ease.”

“Then,” said the young man, “I command you to take me thither instantly,
and to show me the treasure.”

“I obey,” said Zadok.

He stamped his foot upon the ground. In an instant the walls of the
prison split asunder, and the sky was above them. The Demon leaped from
the earth, carrying the young man by the girdle, and flew through the
air so swiftly that the stars appeared to slide away behind them. In a
moment he set the young man again upon the ground, and Aben Hassen the
Fool found himself at the end of what appeared to be a vast and splendid
garden.

“We are now,” said Zadok, “above the treasure-house of which I spoke. It
was here that I saw thy father seal it so that no one but the master of
Zadok may enter. Thou mayst go in any time it may please thee, for it is
thine.”

“I would enter into it now,” said Aben Hassen the Fool.

“Thou shalt enter,” said Zadok. He stooped, and with his finger-point he
drew a circle upon the ground where they stood; then he stamped with his
heel upon the circle. Instantly the earth opened, and there appeared a
flight of marble steps leading downward into the earth. Zadok led the
way down the steps and the young man followed. At the bottom of the
steps there was a door of adamant. Upon the door were these words in
letters as black as ink, in the handwriting of the old man who had gone:

“Oh, fool! Fool! Beware what thou doest. Within here shalt thou find
death!”

There was a key of brass in the door. The King of the Demons turned the
key and opened the door. The young man entered after him.

Aben Hassen the Fool found himself in a vast vaulted room, lit by the
light of a single carbuncle set in the centre of the dome above. In the
middle of the marble floor was a great basin twenty paces broad, and
filled to the brim with money such as he had found in the brazen vessel
in the garden.

The young man could not believe what he saw with his own eyes. “Oh,
marvel of marvels!” he cried; “little wonder you could give me boundless
wealth from such a storehouse as this.”

Zadok laughed. “This,” said he, “is nothing; come with me.”

He led him from this room to another--like it vaulted, and like it lit
by a carbuncle set in the dome of the roof above. In the middle of the
floor was a basin such as Aben Hassen the Fool had seen in the other
room beyond; only this was filled with gold as that had been filled with
silver, and the gold was like that he had found in the garden. When
the young man saw this vast and amazing wealth he stood speechless and
breathless with wonder. The Demon Zadok laughed. “This,” said he, “is
great, but it is little. Come and I will show thee a marvel indeed.”

He took the young man by the hand and led him into a third room--vaulted
as the other two had been, lit as they had been by a carbuncle in the
roof above. But when the young man’s eyes saw what was in this third
room, he was like a man turned drunk with wonder. He had to lean against
the wall behind him, for the sight made him dizzy.

In the middle of the room was such as basin as he had seen in the two
other rooms, only it was filled with jewels--diamonds and rubies and
emeralds and sapphires and precious stones of all kinds--that sparkled
and blazed and flamed like a million stars. Around the wall, and facing
the basin from all sides, stood six golden statues. Three of them were
statues of the kings and three of them were statues of the queens who
had gathered together all this vast and measureless wealth of ancient
Egypt.

There was space for a seventh statue, but where it should have stood was
a great arched door of adamant. The door was tightly shut, and there was
neither lock nor key to it. Upon the door were written these words in
letters of flame:

“Behold! Beyond this door is that alone which shall satisfy all thy
desires.”

“Tell me, Zadok,” said the young man, after he had filled his soul with
all the other wonders that surrounded him--“tell me what is there that
lies beyond that door?”

“That I am forbidden to tell thee, O master!” said the King of the
Demons of the Earth.

“Then open the door for me,” said the young man; “for I cannot open it
for myself, as there is neither lock nor key to it.”

“That also I am forbidden to do,” said Zadok.

“I wish that I knew what was there,” said the young man.

The Demon laughed. “Some time,” said he, “thou mayest find for thyself.
Come, let us leave here and go to the palace which thy father built
years ago, and which he left behind him when he quitted this place for
the place in which thou knewest him.”

He led the way and the young man followed; they passed through the
vaulted rooms and out through the door of adamant, and Zadok locked it
behind them and gave the key to the young man.

“All this is thine now,” he said; “I give it to thee as I gave it to thy
father. I have shown thee how to enter, and thou mayst go in whenever it
pleases thee to do so.”

They ascended the steps, and so reached the garden above. Then Zadok
struck his heel upon the ground, and the earth closed as it had opened.
He led the young man from the spot until they had come to a wide avenue
that led to the palace beyond. “Here I leave thee,” said the Demon, “But
if ever thou hast need of me, call and I will come.”

Thereupon he vanished like a flash, leaving the young man standing like
one in a dream.

He saw before him a garden of such splendor and magnificence as he had
never dreamed of even in his wildest fancy. There were seven fountains
as clear as crystal that shot high into the air and fell back into
basins of alabaster. There was a broad avenue as white as snow, and
thousands of lights lit up everything as light as day. Upon either side
of the avenue stood a row of black slaves, clad in garments of white
silk, and with jewelled turbans upon their heads. Each held a flaming
torch of sandal-wood. Behind the slaves stood a double row of armed men,
and behind them a great crowd of other slaves and attendants, dressed
each as magnificently as a prince, blazing and flaming with innumerable
jewels and ornaments of gold.

But of all these things the young man thought nothing and saw nothing;
for at the end of the marble avenue there arose a palace, the like of
which was not in the four quarters of the earth--a palace of marble and
gold and carmine and ultramarine--rising into the purple starry sky,
and shining in the moonlight like a vision of Paradise. The palace was
illuminated from top to bottom and from end to end; the windows shone
like crystal, and from it came sounds of music and rejoicing.

When the crowd that stood waiting saw the young man appear, they
shouted: “Welcome! Welcome! To the master who has come again! To Aben
Hassen the Fool!”

The young man walked up the avenue of marble to the palace, surrounded
by the armed attendants in their dresses of jewels and gold, and
preceded by dancing-girls as beautiful as houris, who danced and sung
before him. He was dizzy with joy. “All--all this,” he exulted, “belongs
to me. And to think that if I had listened to the Talisman of Solomon I
would have had none of it.”

That was the way he came back to the treasure of the ancient kings of
Egypt, and to the palace of enchantment that his father had quitted.

For seven months he lived a life of joy and delight, surrounded by
crowds of courtiers as though they were a king, and going from pleasure
to pleasure without end. Nor had he any fear of an end coming to it, for
he knew that his treasure was inexhaustible. He made friends with the
princes and nobles of the land. From far and wide people came to visit
him, and the renown of his magnificence filled all the world. When
men would praise any one they would say, “He is as rich,” or as
“magnificent,” or as “generous, as Aben Hassen the Fool.”

So for seven months he lived a life of joy and delight; then one morning
he awakened and found everything changed to grief and mourning. Where
the day before had been laughter, to-day was crying. Where the day
before had been mirth, to-day was lamentation. All the city was shrouded
in gloom, and everywhere was weeping and crying.

Seven black slaves stood on guard near Aben Hassen the Fool as he lay
upon his couch. “What means all this sorrow?” said he to one of the
slaves.

Instantly all the slaves began howling and beating their heads, and he
to whom the young man had spoken fell down with his face in the dust,
and lay there twisting and writhing like a worm.

“He has asked the question!” howled the slaves--“he has asked the
question!”

“Are you mad?” cried the young man. “What is the matter with you?”

At the doorway of the room stood a beautiful female slave, bearing in
her hands a jewelled basin of gold, filled with rose-water, and a fine
linen napkin for the young man to wash and dry his hands upon. “Tell
me,” said the young man, “what means all this sorrow and lamentation?”

Instantly the beautiful slave dropped the golden basin upon the stone
floor, and began shrieking and tearing her clothes. “He has asked the
question!” she screamed--“he has asked the question!”

The young man began to grow frightened; he arose from his couch,
and with uneven steps went out into the anteroom. There he found his
chamberlain waiting for him with a crowd of attendants and courtiers.
“Tell me,” said Aben Hassen the Fool, “why are you all so sorrowful?”

Instantly they who stood waiting began crying and tearing their clothes
and beating their hands. As for the chamberlain--he was a reverend old
man--his eyes sparkled with anger, and his fingers twitched as though
he would have struck if he had dared. “What,” he cried, “art thou not
contented with all thou hast and with all that we do for thee without
asking the forbidden question?”

Thereupon he tore his cap from his head and flung it upon the ground,
and began beating himself violently upon the head with great outcrying.

Aben Hassen the Fool, not knowing what to think or what was to happen,
ran back into the bedroom again. “I think everybody in this place has
gone mad,” said he. “Nevertheless, if I do not find out what it all
means, I shall go mad myself.”

Then he bethought himself, for the first time since he came to that
land, of the Talisman of Solomon.

“Tell me, O Talisman,” said he, “why all these people weep and wail so
continuously?”

“Rest content,” said the Talisman of Solomon, “with knowing that which
concerns thine own self, and seek not to find an answer that will be
to thine own undoing. Be thou also further advised: do not question the
Demon Zadok.”

“Fool that I am,” said the young man, stamping his foot; “here am I
wasting all this time when, if I had but thought of Zadok at first, he
would have told me all. Then he called aloud, Zadok! Zadok! Zadok!”

Instantly the ground shook beneath his feet, the dust rose in clouds,
and there stood Zadok as black as ink, and with eyes that shone like
fire.

“Tell me,” said the young man; “I command thee to tell me, O Zadok! Why
are the people all gone mad this morning, and why do they weep and
wail, and why do they go crazy when I do but ask them why they are so
afflicted?”

“I will tell thee,” said Zadok. “Seven-and-thirty years ago there was a
queen over this land--the most beautiful that ever was seen. Thy father,
who was the wisest and most cunning magician in the world, turned her
into stone, and with her all the attendants in her palace. No one since
that time has been permitted to enter the palace--it is forbidden for
any one even to ask a question concerning it; but every year, on the
day on which the queen was turned to stone, the whole land mourns with
weeping and wailing. And now thou knowest all!”

“What you tell me,” said the young man, “passes wonder. But tell me
further, O Zadok, is it possible for me to see this queen whom my father
turned to stone?”

“Nothing is easier,” said Zadok.

“Then,” said the young man, “I command you to take me to where she is,
so that I may see her with mine own eyes.”

“I hear and obey,” said the Demon.

He seized the young man by the girdle, and in an instant flew away with
him to a hanging-garden that lay before the queen’s palace.

“Thou art the first man,” said Zadok, “who has seen what thou art about
to see for seven-and-thirty years. Come, I will show thee a queen, the
most beautiful that the eyes of man ever looked upon.”

He led the way, and the young man followed, filled with wonder and
astonishment. Not a sound was to be heard, not a thing moved, but
silence hung like a veil between the earth and the sky.

Following the Demon, the young man ascended a flight of steps, and so
entered the vestibule of the palace. There stood guards in armor of
brass and silver and gold. But they were without life--they were all of
stone as white as alabaster. Thence they passed through room after room
and apartment after apartment crowded with courtiers and nobles and
lords in their robes of office, magnificent beyond fancying, but each
silent and motionless--each a stone as white as alabaster. At last
they entered an apartment in the very centre of the palace. There sat
seven-and-forty female attendants around a couch of purple and gold.
Each of the seven-and-forty was beautiful beyond what the young man
could have believed possible, and each was clad in a garment of silk
as white as snow, embroidered with threads of silver and studded with
glistening diamonds. But each sat silent and motionless--each was a
stone as white as alabaster.

Upon the couch in the centre of the apartment reclined a queen with a
crown of gold upon her head. She lay there motionless, still. She was
cold and dead--of stone as white as marble. The young man approached and
looked into her face, and when he looked his breath became faint and his
heart grew soft within him like wax in a flame of fire.

He sighed; he melted; the tears burst from his eyes and ran down his
cheeks. “Zadok!” he cried--“Zadok! Zadok! What have you done to show
me this wonder of beauty and love! Alas! That I have seen her; for the
world is nothing to me now. O Zadok! That she were flesh and blood,
instead of cold stone! Tell me, Zadok, I command you to tell me, was
she once really alive as I am alive, and did my father truly turn her to
stone as she lies here?”

“She was really alive as thou art alive, and he did truly transform her
to this stone,” said Zadok.

“And tell me,” said the young man, “can she never become alive again?”

“She can become alive, and it lies with you to make her alive,” said the
Demon. “Listen, O master. Thy father possessed a wand, half of silver
and half of gold. Whatsoever he touched with silver became converted
to stone, such as thou seest all around thee here; but whatsoever, O
master, he touched with the gold, it became alive, even if it were a
dead stone.”

“Tell me, Zadok,” cried the young man; “I command you to tell me, where
is that wand of silver and gold?”

“I have it with me,” said Zadok.

“Then give it to me; I command you to give it to me.”

“I hear and obey,” said Zadok. He drew from his girdle a wand, half of
gold and half of silver, as he spoke, and gave it to the young man.

“Thou mayst go now, Zadok,” said the young man, trembling with
eagerness.

Zadok laughed and vanished. The young man stood for a while looking down
at the beautiful figure of alabaster. Then he touched the lips with the
golden tip of the wand. In an instant there came a marvellous change.
He saw the stone melt, and begin to grow flexible and soft. He saw it
become warm, and the cheeks and lips grow red with life. Meantime a
murmur had begun to rise all through the palace. It grew louder and
louder--it became a shout. The figure of the queen that had been stone
opened its eyes.

“Who are you?” it said.

Aben Hassen the Fool fell upon his knees. “I am he who was sent to bring
you to life.” he said. “My father turned you to cold stone, and I--I
have brought you back to warm life again.”

The queen smiled--her teeth sparkled like pearls. “If you have brought
me to life, then I am yours,” she said, and she kissed him upon the
lips.

He grew suddenly dizzy; the world swam before his eyes.

For seven days nothing was heard in the town but rejoicing and joy. The
young man lived in a golden cloud of delight. “And to think,” said he,
“if I had listened to that accursed Talisman of Solomon, called The
Wise,’ all this happiness, this ecstasy that is now mine, would have
been lost to me.”

“Tell me, beloved,” said the queen, upon the morning of the seventh
day--“thy father once possessed all the hidden treasure of the ancient
kings of Egypt--tell me, is it now thine as it was once his?”

“Yes,” said the young man, “it is now all mine as it was once all his.”

“And do you really love me as you say?”

“Yes,” said the young man, “and ten thousand times more than I say.”

“Then, as you love me, I beg one boon on you. It is that you show me
this treasure of which I have heard so much, and which we are to enjoy
together.”

The young man was drunk with happiness. “Thou shalt see it all,” said
he.

Then, for the first time, the Talisman spoke without being questioned.
“Fool!” it cried; “wilt thou not be advised?”

“Be silent,” said the young man. “Six times, vile thing, you would have
betrayed me. Six times you would have deprived me of joys that should
have been mine, and each was greater than that which went before. Shall
I now listen the seventh time? Now,” said he to the queen, “I will show
you our treasure.” He called aloud, “Zadok, Zadok, Zadok!”

Instantly the ground shook beneath their feet, the dust rose in clouds,
and Zadok appeared, as black as ink, and with eyes that shone like coals
of fire.

“I command you,” said the young man, “to carry the queen and myself to
the garden where my treasure lies hidden.”

Zadok laughed aloud. “I hear thee and obey thee, master,” said he.

He seized the queen and the young man by the girdle, and in an instant
transported them to the garden and to the treasure-house.

“Thou art where thou commandest to be,” said the Demon.

The young man immediately drew a circle upon the ground with his
finger-tip. He struck his heel upon the circle. The ground opened,
disclosing the steps leading downward. The young man descended the steps
with the queen behind him, and behind them both came the Demon Zadok.

The young man opened the door of adamant and entered the first of the
vaulted rooms.

When the queen saw the huge basin full of silver treasure, her cheeks
and her forehead flushed as red as fire.

They went into the next room, and when the queen saw the basin of gold
her face turned as white as ashes.

They went into the third room, and when the queen saw the basin of
jewels and the six golden statues her face turned as blue as lead, and
her eyes shone green like a snake’s.

“Are you content?” asked the young man.

The queen looked about her. “No!” cried she, hoarsely, pointing to the
closed door that had never been opened, and whereon were engraved these
words:

“Behold! Beyond this door is that alone which shall satisfy all thy
desires.”

“No!” cried she. “What is it that lies behind yon door?”

“I do not know,” said the young man.

“Then open the door, and let me see what lies within.”

“I cannot open the door,” said he. “How can I open the door, seeing that
there is no lock nor key to it?”

“If thou dost not open the door,” said the queen, “all is over between
thee and me. So do as I bid thee, or leave me forever.”

They had both forgotten that the Demon Zadok was there. Then the young
man bethought himself of the Talisman of Solomon. “Tell me, O Talisman,”
 said he, “how shall I open yonder door?”

“Oh, wretched one!” cried the Talisman, “oh, wretched one! Fly while
there is yet time--fly, for thy doom is near! Do not push the door open,
for it is not locked!”

The young man struck his head with his clinched fist. “What a fool am
I!” he cried. “Will I never learn wisdom. Here have I been coming to
this place seven months, and have never yet thought to try whether
yonder door was locked or not!”

“Open the door!” cried the queen.

They went forward together. The young man pushed the door with his hand.
It opened swiftly and silently, and they entered.

Within was a narrow room as red as blood. A flaming lamp hung from the
ceiling above. The young man stood as though turned to stone, for there
stood a gigantic Black Demon with a napkin wrapped around his loins and
a scimitar in his right hand, the blade of which gleamed like lightning
in the flame of the lamp. Before him lay a basket filled with sawdust.

When the queen saw what she saw she screamed in a loud voice, “Thou hast
found it! Thou hast found it! Thou hast found what alone can satisfy all
thy desires! Strike, O slave!”

The young man heard the Demon Zadok give a yell of laughter. He saw a
whirl and a flash, and then he knew nothing.

The Black had struck--the blade had fallen, and the head of Aben Hassen
the Fool rolled into the basket of sawdust that stood waiting for it.

“Aye, aye,” said St. George, “and so it should end. For what was your
Aben Hassen the Fool but a heathen Paniem? Thus should the heads of all
the like be chopped off from their shoulders. Is there not some one here
to tell us a fair story about a saint?”

“For the matter of that,” said the Lad who fiddled when the Jew was in
the bramble-bush--“for the matter of that I know a very good story that
begins about a saint and a hazel-nut.

“Say you so?” said St. George. “Well, let us have it. But stay, friend,
thou hast no ale in thy pot. Wilt thou not let me pay for having it
filled?”

“That,” said the Lad who fiddled when the Jew was in the bramble-bush,
“may be as you please, Sir Knight; and, to tell the truth, I will be
mightily glad for a drop to moisten my throat withal.”

“But,” said Fortunatus, “you have not told us what the story is to be
about.”

“It is,” said the Lad who fiddled for the Jew in the bramble-bush,
“about--”




Ill-Luck and the Fiddler

Once upon a time St. Nicholas came down into the world to take a peep
at the old place and see how things looked in the spring-time. On he
stepped along the road to the town where he used to live, for he had
a notion to find out whether things were going on nowadays as they
one time did. By-and-by he came to a cross-road, and who should he
see sitting there but Ill-Luck himself. Ill-Luck’s face was as gray as
ashes, and his hair as white as snow--for he is as old as Grandfather
Adam--and two great wings grew out of his shoulders--for he flies fast
and comes quickly to those whom he visits, does Ill-Luck.

Now, St. Nicholas had a pocketful of hazel-nuts, which he kept cracking
and eating as he trudged along the road, and just then he came upon one
with a worm-hole in it. When he saw Ill-Luck it came into his head to do
a good turn to poor sorrowful man.

“Good-morning, Ill-Luck,” says he.

“Good-morning, St. Nicholas,” says Ill-Luck.

“You look as hale and strong as ever,” says St. Nicholas.

“Ah, yes,” says Ill-Luck, “I find plenty to do in this world of woe.”

“They tell me,” says St. Nicholas, “that you can go wherever you choose,
even if it be through a key-hole; now, is that so?”

“Yes,” says Ill-Luck, “it is.”

“Well, look now, friend,” says St. Nicholas, “could you go into this
hazel-nut if you chose to?”

“Yes,” says Ill-Luck, “I could indeed.”

“I should like to see you,” says St. Nicholas; “for then I should be of
a mind to believe what people say of you.”

“Well,” says Ill-Luck, “I have not much time to be pottering and playing
upon Jack’s fiddle; but to oblige an old friend”--thereupon he made
himself small and smaller, and--phst! he was in the nut before you could
wink.

Then what do you think St. Nicholas did? In his hand he held a little
plug of wood, and no sooner had Ill-Luck entered the nut than he stuck
the plug in the hole, and there was man’s enemy as tight as fly in a
bottle.

“So!” says St. Nicholas, “that’s a piece of work well done.” Then he
tossed the hazel-nut under the roots of an oak-tree near by, and went
his way.

And that is how this story begins.

Well, the hazel-nut lay and lay and lay, and all the time that it lay
there nobody met with ill-luck; but, one day, who should come travelling
that way but a rogue of a Fiddler, with his fiddle under his arm. The
day was warm, and he was tired; so down he sat under the shade of the
oak-tree to rest his legs. By-and-by he heard a little shrill voice
piping and crying, “Let me out! let me out! let me out!”

The Fiddler looked up and down, but he could see nobody. “Who are you?”
 says he.

“I am Ill-Luck! Let me out! let me out!”

“Let you out?” says the Fiddler. “Not I; if you are bottled up here it
is the better for all of us;” and, so saying, he tucked his fiddle under
his arm and off he marched.

But before he had gone six steps he stopped. He was one of your peering,
prying sort, and liked more than a little to know all that was to be
known about this or that or the other thing that he chanced to see or
hear. “I wonder where Ill-Luck can be, to be in such a tight place as
he seems to be caught in,” says he to himself; and back he came again.
“Where are you, Ill-Luck?” says he.

“Here I am,” says Ill-Luck--“here in this hazel-nut, under the roots of
the oak-tree.”

Thereupon the Fiddler laid aside his fiddle and bow, and fell to
poking and prying under the roots until he found the nut. Then he began
twisting and turning it in his fingers, looking first on one side and
then on the other, and all the while Ill-Luck kept crying, “Let me out!
let me out!”

It was not long before the Fiddler found the little wooden plug, and
then nothing would do but he must take a peep inside the nut to see if
Ill-Luck was really there. So he picked and pulled at the wooden plug,
until at last out it came; and--phst! pop! out came Ill-Luck along with
it.

Plague take the Fiddler! say I.

“Listen,” says Ill-Luck. “It has been many a long day that I have been
in that hazel-nut, and you are the man that has let me out; for once
in a way I will do a good turn to a poor human body.” Therewith, and
without giving the Fiddler time to speak a word, Ill-Luck caught him up
by the belt, and--whiz! away he flew like a bullet, over hill and over
valley; over moor and over mountain, so fast that not enough wind was
left in the Fiddler’s stomach to say “Bo!”

By-and-by he came to a garden, and there he let the Fiddler drop on
the soft grass below. Then away he flew to attend to other matters of
greater need.

When the Fiddler had gathered his wits together, and himself to
his feet, he saw that he lay in a beautiful garden of flowers and
fruit-trees and marble walks and what not, and that at the end of
it stood a great, splendid house, all built of white marble, with a
fountain in front, and peacocks strutting about on the lawn.

Well, the Fiddler smoothed down his hair and brushed his clothes a bit,
and off he went to see what was to be seen at the grand house at the end
of the garden.

He entered the door, and nobody said no to him. Then he passed through
one room after another, and each was finer than the one he left behind.
Many servants stood around; but they only bowed, and never asked whence
he came. At last he came to a room where a little old man sat at a
table. The table was spread with a feast that smelled so good that it
brought tears to the Fiddler’s eyes and water to his mouth, and all
the plates were of pure gold. The little old man sat alone, but another
place was spread, as though he were expecting some one. As the Fiddler
came in the little old man nodded and smiled. “Welcome!” he cried; “and
have you come at last?”

“Yes,” said the Fiddler, “I have. It was Ill-Luck that brought me.”

“Nay,” said the little old man, “do not say that. Sit down to the table
and eat; and when I have told you all, you will say it was not Ill-Luck,
but Good-Luck, that brought you.”

The Fiddler had his own mind about that; but, all the same, down he sat
at the table, and fell to with knife and fork at the good things, as
though he had not had a bite to eat for a week of Sundays.

“I am the richest man in the world,” says the little old man, after a
while.

“I am glad to hear it,” says the Fiddler.

“You may well be,” said the old man, “for I am all alone in the world,
and without wife or child. And this morning I said to myself that the
first body that came to my house I would take for a son--or a daughter,
as the case might be. You are the first, and so you shall live with me
as long as I live, and after I am gone everything that I have shall be
yours.”

The Fiddler did nothing but stare with open eyes and mouth, as though he
would never shut either again.

Well, the Fiddler lived with the old man for maybe three or four days as
snug and happy a life as ever a mouse passed in a green cheese. As for
the gold and silver and jewels--why, they were as plentiful in that
house as dust in a mill! Everything the Fiddler wanted came to his hand.
He lived high, and slept soft and warm, and never knew what it was to
want either more or less, or great or small. In all of those three or
four days he did nothing but enjoy himself with might and main.

But by-and-by he began to wonder where all the good things came from.
Then, before long, he fell to pestering the old man with questions about
the matter.

At first the old man put him off with short answers, but the Fiddler was
a master-hand at finding out anything he wanted to know. He dinned and
drummed and worried until flesh and blood could stand it no longer. So
at last the old man said that he would show him the treasure-house where
all his wealth came from, and at that the Fiddler was tickled beyond
measure.

The old man took a key from behind the door and led him out into the
garden. There in a corner by the wall was a great trap-door of iron. The
old man fitted the key to the lock and turned it. He lifted the door,
and then went down a steep flight of stone steps, and the Fiddler
followed close at his heels. Down below it was as light as day, for in
the centre of the room hung a great lamp that shone with a bright light
and lit up all the place as bright as day. In the floor were set three
great basins of marble: one was nearly full of silver, one of gold, and
one of gems of all sorts.

“All this is mine,” said the old man, “and after I am gone it shall be
yours. It was left to me as I will leave it to you, and in the meantime
you may come and go as you choose and fill your pockets whenever you
wish to. But there is one thing you must not do: you must never open
that door yonder at the back of the room. Should you do so, Ill-Luck
will be sure to overtake you.”

Oh no! The Fiddler would never think of doing such a thing as opening
the door. The silver and gold and jewels were enough for him. But since
the old man had given him leave, he would just help himself to a few of
the fine things. So he stuffed his pockets full, and then he followed
the old man up the steps and out into the sunlight again.

It took him maybe an hour to count all the money and jewels he had
brought up with him. After he had done that, he began to wonder what was
inside of the little door at the back of the room. First he wondered;
then he began to grow curious; then he began to itch and tingle and burn
as though fifty thousand I-want-to-know nettles were sticking into him
from top to toe. At last he could stand it no longer. “I’ll just go down
yonder,” says he, “and peep through the key-hole; perhaps I can see what
is there without opening the door.”

So down he took the key, and off he marched to the garden. He opened the
trap-door, and went down the steep steps to the room below. There was
the door at the end of the room, but when he came to look there was no
key-hole to it. “Pshaw!” said he, “here is a pretty state of affairs.
Tut! tut! tut! Well, since I have come so far, it would be a pity to
turn back without seeing more.” So he opened the door and peeped in.

“Pooh!” said the Fiddler, “There’s nothing there, after all,” and he
opened the door wide.

Before him was a great long passageway, and at the far end of it he
could see a spark of light as though the sun were shining there. He
listened, and after a while he heard a sound like the waves beating on
the shore. “Well,” says he, “this is the most curious thing I have seen
for a long time. Since I have come so far, I may as well see the end of
it.” So he entered the passageway, and closed the door behind him. He
went on and on, and the spark of light kept growing larger and larger,
and by-and-by--pop! out he came at the other end of the passage.

Sure enough, there he stood on the sea-shore, with the waves beating and
dashing on the rocks. He stood looking and wondering to find himself in
such a place, when all of a sudden something came with a whiz and a rush
and caught him by the belt, and away he flew like a bullet.

By-and-by he managed to screw his head around and look up, and there it
was Ill-Luck that had him. “I thought so,” said the Fiddler; and then he
gave over kicking.

Well; on and on they flew, over hill and valley, over moor and mountain,
until they came to another garden, and there Ill-Luck let the Fiddler
drop.

Swash! Down he fell into the top of an apple-tree, and there he hung in
the branches.

It was the garden of a royal castle, and all had been weeping and woe
(though they were beginning now to pick up their smiles again), and this
was the reason why:

The king of that country had died, and no one was left behind him but
the queen. But she was a prize, for not only was the kingdom hers, but
she was as young as a spring apple and as pretty as a picture; so that
there was no end of those who would have liked to have had her, each man
for his own. Even that day there were three princes at the castle, each
one wanting the queen to marry him; and the wrangling and bickering and
squabbling that was going on was enough to deafen a body. The poor young
queen was tired to death with it all, and so she had come out into
the garden for a bit of rest; and there she sat under the shade of an
apple-tree, fanning herself and crying, when--

Swash! Down fell the Fiddler into the apple-tree and down fell a dozen
apples, popping and tumbling about the queen’s ears.

The queen looked up and screamed, and the Fiddler climbed down.

“Where did you come from?” said she.

“Oh, Ill-Luck brought me,” said the Fiddler.

“Nay,” said the queen, “do not say so. You fell from heaven, for I saw
it with my eyes and heard it with my ears. I see how it is now. You were
sent hither from heaven to be my husband, and my husband you shall be.
You shall be king of this country, half-and-half with me as queen, and
shall sit on a throne beside me.”

You can guess whether or not that was music to the Fiddler’s ears.

So the princes were sent packing, and the Fiddler was married to the
queen, and reigned in that country.

Well, three or four days passed, and all was as sweet and happy as a
spring day. But at the end of that time the Fiddler began to wonder what
was to be seen in the castle. The queen was very fond of him, and was
glad enough to show him all the fine things that were to be seen; so
hand in hand they went everywhere, from garret to cellar.

But you should have seen how splendid it all was! The Fiddler felt more
certain than ever that it was better to be a king than to be the richest
man in the world, and he was as glad as glad could be that Ill-Luck had
brought him from the rich little old man over yonder to this.

So he saw everything in the castle but one thing. “What is behind that
door?” said he.

“Ah! that,” said the queen, “you must not ask or wish to know. Should
you open that door Ill-Luck will be sure to overtake you.”

“Pooh!” said the Fiddler, “I don’t care to know, anyhow,” and off they
went, hand in hand.

Yes, that was a very fine thing to say; but before an hour had gone
by the Fiddler’s head began to hum and buzz like a beehive. “I don’t
believe,” said he, “there would be a grain of harm in my peeping inside
that door; all the same, I will not do it. I will just go down and peep
through the key-hole.” So off he went to do as he said; but there was
no key-hole to that door, either. “Why, look!” says he, “it is just like
the door at the rich man’s house over yonder; I wonder if it is the same
inside as outside,” and he opened the door and peeped in. Yes; there was
the long passage and the spark of light at the far end, as though the
sun were shining. He cocked his head to one side and listened. “Yes,”
 said he, “I think I hear the water rushing, but I am not sure; I will
just go a little further in and listen,” and so he entered and closed
the door behind him. Well, he went on and on until--pop! there he was
out at the farther end, and before he knew what he was about he had
stepped out upon the sea-shore, just as he had done before.

Whiz! whirr! Away flew the Fiddler like a bullet, and there was Ill-Luck
carrying him by the belt again. Away they sped, over hill and valley,
over moor and mountain, until the Fiddler’s head grew so dizzy that
he had to shut his eyes. Suddenly Ill-Luck let him drop, and down he
fell--thump! bump!--on the hard ground. Then he opened his eyes and sat
up, and, lo and behold! there he was, under the oak-tree whence he had
started in the first place. There lay his fiddle, just as he had left
it. He picked it up and ran his fingers over the strings--trum, twang!
Then he got to his feet and brushed the dirt and grass from his knees.
He tucked his fiddle under his arm, and off he stepped upon the way he
had been going at first.

“Just to think!” said he, “I would either have been the richest man
in the world, or else I would have been a king, if it had not been for
Ill-Luck.”

And that is the way we all of us talk.


Dr. Faustus had sat all the while neither drinking ale nor smoking
tobacco, but with his hands folded, and in silence. “I know not why it
is,” said he, “but that story of yours, my friend, brings to my mind
a story of a man whom I once knew--a great magician in his time, and
a necromancer and a chemist and an alchemist and mathematician and a
rhetorician, an astronomer, an astrologer, and a philosopher as well.”

“Tis a long list of excellency,” said old Bidpai.

“Tis not as long as was his head,” said Dr. Faustus.

“It would be good for us all to hear a story of such a man,” said old
Bidpai.

“Nay,” said Dr. Faustus, “the story is not altogether of the man
himself, but rather of a pupil who came to learn wisdom of him.”

“And the name of your story is what?” said Fortunatus.

“It hath no name,” said Dr. Faustus.

“Nay,” said St. George, “everything must have a name.”

“It hath no name,” said Dr. Faustus. “But I shall give it a name, and it
shall be--”




Empty Bottles

In the old, old days when men were wiser than they are in these times,
there lived a great philosopher and magician, by name Nicholas Flamel.
Not only did he know all the actual sciences, but the black arts as
well, and magic, and what not. He conjured demons so that when a body
passed the house of a moonlight night a body might see imps, great and
small, little and big, sitting on the chimney stacks and the ridge-pole,
clattering their heels on the tiles and chatting together.

He could change iron and lead into silver and gold; he discovered the
elixir of life, and might have been living even to this day had he
thought it worth while to do so.

There was a student at the university whose name was Gebhart, who was so
well acquainted with algebra and geometry that he could tell at a single
glance how many drops of water there were in a bottle of wine. As
for Latin and Greek--he could patter them off like his A B C’s.
Nevertheless, he was not satisfied with the things he knew, but was for
learning the things that no schools could teach him. So one day he came
knocking at Nicholas Flamel’s door.

“Come in,” said the wise man, and there Gebhart found him sitting in the
midst of his books and bottles and diagrams and dust and chemicals and
cobwebs, making strange figures upon the table with jackstraws and a
piece of chalk--for your true wise man can squeeze more learning out of
jackstraws and a piece of chalk than we common folk can get out of all
the books in the world.

No one else was in the room but the wise man’s servant, whose name was
Babette.

“What is it you want?” said the wise man, looking at Gebhart over the
rim of his spectacles.

“Master,” said Gebhart, “I have studied day after day at the university,
and from early in the morning until late at night, so that my head has
hummed and my eyes were sore, yet I have not learned those things that
I wish most of all to know--the arts that no one but you can teach. Will
you take me as your pupil?”

The wise man shook his head.

“Many would like to be as wise as that,” said he, “and few there be who
can become so. Now tell me. Suppose all the riches of the world were
offered to you, would you rather be wise?”

“Yes.”

“Suppose you might have all the rank and power of a king or of an
emperor, would you rather be wise?”

“Yes.”

“Suppose I undertook to teach you, would you give up everything of joy
and of pleasure to follow me?”

“Yes.”

“Perhaps you are hungry,” said the master.

“Yes,” said the student, “I am.”

“Then, Babette, you may bring some bread and cheese.”

It seemed to Gebhart that he had learned all that Nicholas Flamel had to
teach him.

It was in the gray of the dawning, and the master took the pupil by the
hand and led him up the rickety stairs to the roof of the house, where
nothing was to be seen but gray sky, high roofs, and chimney stacks from
which the smoke rose straight into the still air.

“Now,” said the master, “I have taught you nearly all of the science
that I know, and the time has come to show you the wonderful thing that
has been waiting for us from the beginning when time was. You have given
up wealth and the world and pleasure and joy and love for the sake of
wisdom. Now, then, comes the last test--whether you can remain faithful
to me to the end; if you fail in it, all is lost that you have gained.”

After he said that he stripped his cloak away from his shoulders and
laid bare the skin. Then he took a bottle of red liquor and began
bathing his shoulder-blades with it; and as Gebhart, squatting upon
the ridge-pole, looked, he saw two little lumps bud out upon the smooth
skin, and then grow and grow and grow until they became two great wings
as white as snow.

“Now then,” said the master, “take me by the belt and grip fast, for
there is a long, long journey before us, and if you should lose your
head and let go your hold you will fall and be dashed to pieces.”

Then he spread the two great wings, and away he flew as fast as the
wind, with Gebhart hanging to his belt.

Over hills, over dales, over mountains, over moors he flew, with the
brown earth lying so far below that horses and cows looked like pismires
and men like fleas.

Then, by-and-by, it was over the ocean they were crossing, with the
great ships that pitched and tossed below looking like chips in a puddle
in rainy weather.

At last they came to a strange land, far, far away, and there the master
lit upon a sea-shore where the sand was as white as silver. As soon as
his feet touched the hard ground the great wings were gone like a puff
of smoke, and the wise man walked like any other body.

At the edge of the sandy beach was a great, high, naked cliff; and the
only way of reaching the top was by a flight of stone steps, as slippery
as glass, cut in the solid rock.

The wise man led the way, and the student followed close at his heels,
every now and then slipping and stumbling so that, had it not been for
the help that the master gave him, he would have fallen more than once
and have been dashed to pieces upon the rocks below.

At last they reached the top, and there found themselves in a desert,
without stick of wood or blade of grass, but only gray stones and skulls
and bones bleaching in the sun.

In the middle of the plain was a castle such as the eyes of man never
saw before, for it was built all of crystal from roof to cellar.
Around it was a high wall of steel, and in the wall were seven gates of
polished brass.

The wise man led the way straight to the middle gate of the seven, where
there hung a horn of pure silver, which he set to his lips. He blew
a blast so loud and shrill that it made Gebhart’s ears tingle. In an
instant there sounded a great rumble and grumble like the noise of
loud thunder, and the gates of brass swung slowly back, as though of
themselves.

But when Gebhart saw what he saw within the gates his heart crumbled
away for fear, and his knees knocked together; for there, in the very
middle of the way, stood a monstrous, hideous dragon, that blew out
flames and clouds of smoke from his gaping mouth like a chimney a-fire.

But the wise master was as cool as smooth water; he thrust his hand
into the bosom of his jacket and drew forth a little black box, which he
flung straight into the gaping mouth.

Snap!--the dragon swallowed the box.

The next moment it gave a great, loud, terrible cry, and, clapping and
rattling its wings, leaped into the air and flew away, bellowing like a
bull.

If Gebhart had been wonder-struck at seeing the outside of the castle,
he was ten thousand times more amazed to see the inside thereof. For,
as the master led the way and he followed, he passed through
four-and-twenty rooms, each one more wonderful than the other.
Everywhere was gold and silver and dazzling jewels that glistened so
brightly that one had to shut one’s eyes to their sparkle. Beside all
this, there were silks and satins and velvets and laces and crystal and
ebony and sandal-wood that smelled sweeter than musk and rose leaves.
All the wealth of the world brought together into one place could
not make such riches as Gebhart saw with his two eyes in these
four-and-twenty rooms. His heart beat fast within him.

At last they reached a little door of solid iron, beside which hung a
sword with a blade that shone like lightning. The master took the sword
in one hand and laid the other upon the latch of the door. Then he
turned to Gebhart and spoke for the first time since they had started
upon their long journey.

“In this room,” said he, “you will see a strange thing happen, and in a
little while I shall be as one dead. As soon as that comes to pass, go
you straightway through to the room beyond, where you will find upon a
marble table a goblet of water and a silver dagger. Touch nothing else,
and look at nothing else, for if you do all will be lost to both of us.
Bring the water straightway, and sprinkle my face with it, and when that
is done you and I will be the wisest and greatest men that ever lived,
for I will make you equal to myself in all that I know. So now swear to
do what I have just bid you, and not turn aside a hair’s breadth in the
going and the coming.

“I swear,” said Gebhart, and crossed his heart.

Then the master opened the door and entered, with Gebhart close at his
heels.

In the centre of the room was a great red cock, with eyes that shone
like sparks of fire. So soon as he saw the master he flew at him,
screaming fearfully, and spitting out darts of fire that blazed and
sparkled like lightning.

It was a dreadful battle between the master and the cock. Up and down
they fought, and here and there. Sometimes the student could see the
wise man whirling and striking with his sword; and then again he would
be hidden in a sheet of flame. But after a while he made a lucky stroke,
and off flew the cock’s head. Then, lo and behold! instead of a cock it
was a great, hairy, black demon that lay dead on the floor.

But, though the master had conquered, he looked like one sorely sick. He
was just able to stagger to a couch that stood by the wall, and there he
fell and lay, without breath or motion, like one dead, and as white as
wax.

As soon as Gebhart had gathered his wits together he remembered what the
master had said about the other room.

The door of it was also of iron. He opened it and passed within, and
there saw two great tables or blocks of polished marble. Upon one was
the dagger and a goblet of gold brimming with water. Upon the other lay
the figure of a woman, and as Gebhart looked at her he thought her more
beautiful than any thought or dream could picture. But her eyes were
closed, and she lay like a lifeless figure of wax.

After Gebhart had gazed at her a long, long time, he took up the goblet
and the dagger from the table and turned towards the door.

Then, before he left that place, he thought that he would have just one
more look at the beautiful figure. So he did, and gazed and gazed until
his heart melted away within him like a lump of butter; and, hardly
knowing what he did, he stooped and kissed the lips.

Instantly he did so a great humming sound filled the whole castle, so
sweet and musical that it made him tremble to listen. Then suddenly the
figure opened its eyes and looked straight at him.

“At last!” she said; “have you come at last?”

“Yes,” said Gebhart, “I have come.”

Then the beautiful woman arose and stepped down from the table to the
floor; and if Gebhart thought her beautiful before, he thought her a
thousand times more beautiful now that her eyes looked into his.

“Listen,” said she. “I have been asleep for hundreds upon hundreds of
years, for so it was fated to be until he should come who was to bring
me back to life again. You are he, and now you shall live with me
forever. In this castle is the wealth gathered by the king of the genii,
and it is greater than all the riches of the world. It and the castle
likewise shall be yours. I can transport everything into any part of the
world you choose, and can by my arts make you prince or king or emperor.
Come.”

“Stop,” said Gebhart. “I must first do as my master bade me.”

He led the way into the other room, the lady following him, and so they
both stood together by the couch where the wise man lay. When the lady
saw his face she cried out in a loud voice: “It is the great master!
What are you going to do?”

“I am going to sprinkle his face with this water,” said Gebhart.

“Stop!” said she. “Listen to what I have to say. In your hand you hold
the water of life and the dagger of death. The master is not dead, but
sleeping; if you sprinkle that water upon him he will awaken, young,
handsome and more powerful than the greatest magician that ever lived.
I myself, this castle, and everything that is in it will be his, and,
instead of your becoming a prince or a king or an emperor, he will be so
in your place. That, I say, will happen if he wakens. Now the dagger
of death is the only thing in the world that has power to kill him. You
have it in your hand. You have but to give him one stroke with it
while he sleeps, and he will never waken again, and then all will be
yours--your very own.”

Gebhart neither spoke nor moved, but stood looking down upon his master.
Then he set down the goblet very softly on the floor, and, shutting his
eyes that he might not see the blow, raised the dagger to strike.

“That is all your promises amount to,” said Nicholas Flamel the wise
man. “After all, Babette, you need not bring the bread and cheese, for
he shall be no pupil of mine.”

Then Gebhart opened his eyes.

There sat the wise man in the midst of his books and bottles and
diagrams and dust and chemicals and cobwebs, making strange figures upon
the table with jackstraws and a piece of chalk.

And Babette, who had just opened the cupboard door for the loaf of
bread and the cheese, shut it again with a bang, and went back to her
spinning.

So Gebhart had to go back again to his Greek and Latin and algebra and
geometry; for, after all, one cannot pour a gallon of beer into a quart
pot, or the wisdom of a Nicholas Flamel into such an one as Gebhart.

As for the name of this story, why, if some promises are not bottles
full of nothing but wind, there is little need to have a name for
anything.


“Since we are in the way of talking of fools,” said the Fisherman who
drew the Genie out of the sea--“since we are in the way of talking of
fools, I can tell you a story of the fool of all fools, and how, one
after the other, he wasted as good gifts as a man’s ears ever heard tell
of.”

“What was his name?” said the Lad who fiddled for the Jew in the
bramble-bush.

“That,” said the Fisherman, “I do not know.”

“And what is this story about?” asked St. George.

“Tis,” said the Fisherman, “about a hole in the ground.”

“And is that all?” said the Soldier who cheated the Devil.

“Nay,” said the Fisherman, blowing a whiff from his pipe; “there were
some things in the hole--a bowl of treasure, an earthen-ware jar, and a
pair of candlesticks.”

“And what do you call your story,” said St. George.

“Why,” said the Fisherman, “for lack of a better name I will call it--”




Good Gifts and a Fool’s Folly.

Give a fool heaven and earth, and all the stars, and he will make ducks
and drakes of them.

Once upon a time there was an old man, who, by thrifty living and long
saving, had laid by a fortune great enough to buy ease and comfort and
pleasure for a lifetime.

By-and-by he died, and the money came to his son, who was of a different
sort from the father; for, what that one had gained by the labor of a
whole year, the other spent in riotous living in one week.

So it came about in a little while that the young man found himself
without so much as a single penny to bless himself withal. Then his
fair-weather friends left him, and the creditors came and seized upon
his house and his household goods, and turned him out into the cold
wide world to get along as best he might with the other fools who lived
there.

Now the young spendthrift was a strong, stout fellow, and, seeing
nothing better to do, he sold his fine clothes and bought him a porter’s
basket, and went and sat in the corner of the market-place to hire
himself out to carry this or that for folk who were better off in the
world, and less foolish than he.

There he sat, all day long, from morning until evening, but nobody came
to hire him. But at last, as dusk was settling, there came along an old
man with beard as white as snow hanging down below his waist. He stopped
in front of the foolish spendthrift, and stood looking at him for a
while; then, at last, seeming to be satisfied, he beckoned with his
finger to the young man. “Come,” said he, “I have a task for you to do,
and if you are wise, and keep a still tongue in your head, I will pay
you as never a porter was paid before.”

You may depend upon it the young man needed no second bidding to such a
matter. Up he rose, and took his basket, and followed the old man, who
led the way up one street and down another, until at last they came to a
rickety, ramshackle house in a part of the town the young man had never
been before. Here the old man stopped and knocked at the door, which
was instantly opened, as though of itself, and then he entered with
the young spendthrift at his heels. The two passed through a dark
passage-way, and another door, and then, lo and behold! all was changed;
for they had come suddenly into such a place as the young man would not
have believed could be in such a house, had he not seen it with his own
eyes. Thousands of waxen tapers lit the place as bright as day--a great
oval room, floored with mosaic of a thousand bright colors and strange
figures, and hung with tapestries of silks and satins and gold and
silver. The ceiling was painted to represent the sky, through which flew
beautiful birds and winged figures so life-like that no one could tell
that they were only painted, and not real. At the farther side of the
room were two richly cushioned couches, and thither the old man led the
way with the young spendthrift following, wonder-struck, and there the
two sat themselves down. Then the old man smote his hands together, and,
in answer, ten young men and ten beautiful girls entered bearing a feast
of rare fruits and wines which they spread before them, and the young
man, who had been fasting since morning, fell to and ate as he had not
eaten for many a day.

The old man, who himself ate but little, waited patiently for the other
to end. “Now,” said he, as soon as the young man could eat no more, “you
have feasted and you have drunk; it is time for us to work.”

Thereupon he rose from the couch and led the way, the young man
following, through an arch door-way into a garden, in the centre of
which was an open space paved with white marble, and in the centre of
that again a carpet, ragged and worn, spread out upon the smooth stones.
Without saying a word, the old man seated himself upon one end of this
carpet, and motioned to the spendthrift to seat himself with his basket
at the other end; then--

“Are you ready?” said the old man.

“Yes,” said the young man, “I am.”

“Then, by the horn of Jacob,” said the old man, “I command thee, O
Carpet! to bear us over hill and valley, over lake and river, to that
spot whither I wish to go.” Hardly had the words left his mouth when
away flew the carpet, swifter than the swiftest wind, carrying the old
man and the young spendthrift, until at last it brought them to a rocky
desert without leaf or blade of grass to be seen far or near. Then it
descended to where there was a circle of sand as smooth as a floor.

The old man rolled up the carpet, and then drew from a pouch that hung
at his side a box, and from the box some sticks of sandal and spice
woods, with which he built a little fire. Next he drew from the same
pouch a brazen jar, from which he poured a gray powder upon the blaze.
Instantly there leaped up a great flame of white light and a cloud of
smoke, which rose high in the air, and there spread out until it hid
everything from sight. Then the old man began to mutter spells, and in
answer the earth shook and quaked, and a rumbling as of thunder filled
the air. At last he gave a loud cry, and instantly the earth split open,
and there the young spendthrift saw a trap-door of iron, in which was an
iron ring to lift it by.

“Look!” said the old man. “Yonder is the task for which I have brought
you; lift for me that trap-door of iron, for it is too heavy for me to
raise, and I will pay you well.”

And it was no small task, either, for, stout and strong as the young man
was, it was all he could do to lift up the iron plate. But at last up
it swung, and down below he saw a flight of stone steps leading into the
earth.

The old man drew from his bosom a copper lamp, which he lit at the fire
of the sandal and spice wood sticks, which had now nearly died away.
Then, leading the way, with the young man following close at his heels,
he descended the stairway that led down below. At the bottom the two
entered a great vaulted room, carved out of the solid stone, upon the
walls of which were painted strange pictures in bright colors of kings
and queens, genii and dragons. Excepting for these painted figures, the
vaulted room was perfectly bare, only that in the centre of the floor
there stood three stone tables. Upon the first table stood an iron
candlestick with three branches; upon the second stood an earthen jar,
empty of everything but dust; upon the third stood a brass bowl, a yard
wide and a yard deep, and filled to the brim with shining, gleaming,
dazzling jewels of all sorts.

“Now,” said the old man to the spendthrift, “I will do to you as I
promised: I will pay you as never man was paid before for such a task.
Yonder upon those three stone tables are three great treasures: choose
whichever one you will, and it is yours.”

“I shall not be long in choosing,” cried the young spendthrift. “I shall
choose the brass bowl of jewels.”

The old man laughed. “So be it,” said he. “Fill your basket from the
bowl with all you can carry, and that will be enough, provided you live
wisely, to make you rich for as long as you live.”

The young man needed no second bidding, but began filling his basket
with both hands, until he had in it as much as he could carry.

Then the old man, taking the iron candlestick and the earthen jar, led
the way up the stairway again. There the young man lowered the iron
trap-door to its place, and so soon as he had done so the other stamped
his heel upon the ground, and the earth closed of itself as smooth and
level as it had been before.

The two sat themselves upon the carpet, the one upon the one end, and
the other upon the other. “By the horn of Jacob,” said the old man,
“I command thee, O Carpet! to fly over hill and valley, over lake and
river, until thou hast brought us back whence we came.”

Away flew the carpet, and in a little time they were back in the garden
from which they had started upon their journey; and there they
parted company. “Go thy way, young man,” said the old graybeard, “and
henceforth try to live more wisely than thou hast done heretofore.
I know well who thou art, and how thou hast lived. Shun thy evil
companions, live soberly, and thou hast enough to make thee rich for as
long as thou livest.”

“Have no fear,” cried the young man, joyfully. “I have learned a bitter
lesson, and henceforth I will live wisely and well.”

So, filled with good resolves, the young man went the next day to his
creditors and paid his debts; he bought back the house which his father
had left him, and there began to lead a new life as he had promised.

But a gray goose does not become white, nor a foolish man a wise one.

At first he led a life sober enough; but by little and little he began
to take up with his old-time friends again, and by-and-by the money went
flying as merrily as ever, only this time he was twenty times richer
than he had been before, and he spent his money twenty times as fast.
Every day there was feasting and drinking going on in his house, and
roaring and rioting and dancing and singing. The wealth of a king could
not keep up such a life forever, so by the end of a year and a half the
last of the treasure was gone, and the young spendthrift was just as
poor as ever. Then once again his friends left him as they had done
before, and all that he could do was to rap his head and curse his
folly.

At last, one morning, he plucked up courage to go to the old man who had
helped him once before, to see whether he would not help him again. Rap!
tap! tap! he knocked at the door, and who should open it but the old man
himself. “Well,” said the graybeard, “what do you want?”

“I want some help,” said the spendthrift; and then he told him all, and
the old man listened and stroked his beard.

“By rights,” said he, when the young man had ended, “I should leave you
alone in your folly; for it is plain to see that nothing can cure you of
it. Nevertheless, as you helped me once, and as I have more than I shall
need, I will share what I have with you. Come in and shut the door.”

He led the way, the spendthrift following, to a little room all of bare
stone, and in which were only three things--the magic carpet, the iron
candlestick, and the earthen jar. This last the old man gave to the
foolish spendthrift. “My friend,” said he, “when you chose the money and
jewels that day in the cavern, you chose the less for the greater. Here
is a treasure that an emperor might well envy you. Whatever you wish for
you will find by dipping your hand into the jar. Now go your way, and
let what was happened cure you of your folly.”

“It shall,” cried the young man; “never again will I be so foolish as I
have been!” And thereupon he went his way with another pocketful of good
resolves.

The first thing he did when he reached home was to try the virtue of his
jar. “I should like,” said he, “to have a handful of just such treasure
as I brought from the cavern over yonder.” He dipped his hand into
the jar, and when he brought it out again it was brimful of shining,
gleaming, sparkling jewels. You can guess how he felt when he saw them.

Well, this time a whole year went by, during which the young man lived
as soberly as a judge. But at the end of the twelvemonth he was so sick
of wisdom that he loathed it as one loathes bitter drink. Then by little
and little he began to take up with his old ways again, and to call his
old cronies around, until at the end of another twelvemonth things were
a hundred times worse and wilder than ever; for now what he had he had
without end.

One day, when he and a great party of roisterers were shouting and
making merry, he brought out his earthen-ware pot to show them the
wonders of it; and to prove its virtue he gave to each guest whatever he
wanted. “What will you have?”--“A handful of gold.”--“Put your hand in
and get it!”--“What will you have?”--“A fistful of pearls.”--“Put
your fist in and get them!”--“What will you have?”--“A necklace of
diamonds.”--“Dip into the jar and get it.” And so he went from one
to another, and each and every one got what he asked for, and such a
shouting and hubbub those walls had never heard before.

Then the young man, holding the jar in his hands, began to dance and to
sing: “O wonderful jar! O beautiful jar! O beloved jar!” and so on, his
friends clapping their hands, and laughing and cheering him. At last,
in the height of his folly, he balanced the earthen jar on his head, and
began dancing around and around with it to show his dexterity.

Smash! crash! The precious jar lay in fifty pieces of the stone floor,
and the young man stood staring at the result of his folly with bulging
eyes, while his friends roared and laughed and shouted louder than ever
over his mishap. And again his treasure and his gay life were gone.

But what had been hard for him to do before was easier now. At the end
of a week he was back at the old man’s house, rapping on the door.
This time the old man asked him never a word, but frowned as black as
thunder.

“I know,” said he, “what has happened to you. If I were wise I should
let you alone in your folly; but once more I will have pity on you and
will help you, only this time it shall be the last.” Once more he led
the way to the stone room, where were the iron candlestick and the
magic carpet, and with him he took a good stout cudgel. He stood the
candlestick in the middle of the room, and taking three candles from his
pouch, thrust one into each branch. Then he struck a light, and lit the
first candle. Instantly there appeared a little old man, clad in a long
white robe, who began dancing and spinning around and around like a top.
He lit the second candle, and a second old man appeared, and round and
round he went, spinning like his brother. He lit the third candle, and
a third old man appeared. Around and around and around they spun and
whirled, until the head spun and whirled to look at them. Then the old
graybeard gripped the cudgel in his hand. “Are you ready?” he asked.

“We are ready, and waiting,” answered the three. Thereupon, without
another word, the graybeard fetched each of the dancers a blow upon the
head with might and main--One! two! three! crack! crash! jingle!

Lo and behold! Instead of the three dancing men, there lay three great
heaps of gold upon the floor, and the spendthrift stood staring like an
owl. “There,” said the old man, “take what you want, and then go your
way, and trouble me no more.”

“Well,” said the spendthrift, “of all the wonders that ever I saw,
this is the most wonderful! But how am I to carry my gold away with me,
seeing I did not fetch my basket?”

“You shall have a basket,” said the old man, “if only you will trouble
me no more. Just wait here a moment until I bring it to you.”

The spendthrift was left all alone in the room; not a soul was there
but himself. He looked up, and he looked down, and scratched his head.
“Why,” he cried aloud, “should I be content to take a part when I can
have the whole?”

To do was as easy as to say. He snatched up the iron candlestick, caught
up the staff that the old man had left leaning against the wall, and
seated himself upon the magic carpet. “By the horn of Jacob,” he cried,
“I command thee, O Carpet! to carry me over hill and valley, over lake
and river, to a place where the old man can never find me.”

Hardly had the words left his mouth than away flew the carpet through
the air, carrying him along with it; away and away, higher than the
clouds and swifter than the wind. Then at last it descended to the earth
again, and when the young spendthrift looked about him, he found himself
in just such a desert place as he and the old man had come to when
they had found the treasure. But he gave no thought to that, and hardly
looked around him to see where he was. All that he thought of was to
try his hand at the three dancers that belonged to the candlestick.
He struck a light, and lit the three candles, and instantly the three
little old men appeared for him just as they had for the old graybeard.
And around and around they spun and whirled, until the sand and dust
spun and whirled along with them. Then the young man grasped his cudgel
tightly.

Now, he had not noticed that when the old man struck the three dancers
he had held the cudgel in his left hand, for he was not wise enough
to know that great differences come from little matters. He griped the
cudgel in his right hand, and struck the dancers with might and main,
just as the old man had done. Crack! crack! crack! one; two; three.

Did they change into piles of gold? Not a bit of it! Each of the dancers
drew from under his robe a cudgel as stout and stouter than the one the
young man himself held, and, without a word, fell upon him and began to
beat and drub him until the dust flew. In vain he hopped and howled and
begged for mercy, in vain he tried to defend himself; the three never
stopped until he fell to the ground, and laid there panting and sighing
and groaning; and then they left and flew back with the iron candlestick
and the magic carpet to the old man again. At last, after a great while,
the young spendthrift sat up, rubbing the sore places; but when he
looked around not a sign was to be seen of anything but the stony
desert, without a house or a man in sight.

Perhaps, after a long time, he found his way home again, and perhaps
the drubbing he had had taught him wisdom; the first is a likely enough
thing to happen, but as for the second, it would need three strong men
to tell it to me a great many times before I would believe it.

You may smile at this story if you like, but, all the same, as certainly
as there is meat in an egg-shell, so is there truth in this nonsense.
For, “Give a fool heaven and earth,” say I, “and all the stars, and he
will make ducks and drakes of them.”


Fortunatus lifted his canican to his lips and took a long, hearty
draught of ale. “Methinks,” said he, “that all your stories have a
twang of the same sort about them. You all of you, except my friend the
Soldier here, play the same tune upon a different fiddle. Nobody comes
to any good.”

St. George drew a long whiff of his pipe, and then puffed out a cloud of
smoke as big as his head. “Perhaps,” said he to Fortunatus, “you know of
a story which turns out differently. If you do, let us have it, for it
is your turn now.”

“Very well,” said Fortunatus, “I will tell you a story that turns out as
it should, where the lad marries a beautiful princess and becomes a king
into the bargain.”

“And what is your story about?” said the Lad who fiddled for Jew in the
bramble-bush.

“It is,” said Fortunatus, “about--”




The Good of a Few Words

There was one Beppo the Wise and another Beppo the Foolish.

The wise one was the father of the foolish one.

Beppo the Wise was called Beppo the Wise because he had laid up a great
treasure after a long life of hard work.

Beppo the Foolish was called Beppo the Foolish because he spent in five
years after his father was gone from this world of sorrow all that the
old man had laid together in his long life of toil. But during that time
Beppo lived as a prince, and the life was never seen in that town before
or since--feasting and drinking and junketing and merrymaking. He had
friends by the dozen and by the scores, and the fame of his doings went
throughout all the land.

While his money lasted he was called Beppo the Generous. It was only
after it was all gone that they called him Beppo the Foolish.

So by-and-by the money was spent, and there was an end of it.

Yes; there was an end of it; and where were all of Beppo’s fair-weather
friends? Gone like the wild-geese in frosty weather.

“Don’t you remember how I gave you a bagful of gold?” says Beppo the
Foolish. “Won’t you remember me now in my time of need?”

But the fair-weather friend only laughed in his face.

“Don’t you remember how I gave you a fine gold chain with a diamond
pendant?” says Beppo to another. “And won’t you lend me a little money
to help me over to-day?”

But the summer-goose friend only grinned.

“But what shall I do to keep body and soul together?” says Beppo to a
third.

The man was a wit. “Go to a shoemaker,” said he, “and let him stitch the
soul fast;” and that was all the good Beppo had of him.

Then poor Beppo saw that there was not place for him in that town, and
so off he went to seek his fortune else whither, for he saw that there
was nothing to be gained in that place.

So he journeyed on for a week and a day, and then towards evening he
came to the king’s town.

There it stood on the hill beside the river--the grandest city in the
kingdom. There were orchards and plantations of trees along the banks
of the stream, and gardens and summer-houses and pavilions. There were
white houses and red roofs and blue skies. Up above on the hill were
olive orchards and fields, and then blue sky again.

Beppo went into the town, gazing about him with admiration. Houses,
palaces, gardens. He had never seen the like. Stores and shops full
of cloths of velvet and silk and satin; goldsmiths, silversmiths,
jewellers--as though all the riches of the world had been emptied into
the city. Crowds of people--lords, noblemen, courtiers, rich merchants,
and tradesmen.

Beppo stared about at the fine sights and everybody stared at Beppo, for
his shoes were dusty, his clothes were travel-stained, and a razor had
not touched his face for a week.

The king of that country was walking in the garden under the shade of
the trees, and the sunlight slanted down upon him, and sparkled upon the
jewels around his neck and on his fingers. Two dogs walked alongside
of him, and a whole crowd of lords and nobles and courtiers came behind
him; first of all the prime-minister with his long staff.

But for all this fine show this king was not really the king. When the
old king died he left a daughter, and she should have been queen if she
had had her own rights. But this king, who was her uncle, had stepped in
before her, and so the poor princess was pushed aside and was nobody at
all but a princess, the king’s niece.

She stood on the terrace with her old nurse, while the king walked in
the garden below.

It had been seven years now since the old king had died, and in that
time she had grown up into a beautiful young woman, as wise as she was
beautiful, and as good as she was wise. Few people ever saw her, but
everybody talked about her in whispers and praised her beauty and
goodness, saying that, if the right were done, she would have her own
and be queen.

Sometimes the king heard of this (for a king hears everything), and he
grew to hate the princess as a man hates bitter drink.

The princess looked down from the terrace, and there she saw Beppo
walking along the street, and his shoes were dusty and his clothes were
travel-stained, and a razor had not touched his face for a week.

“Look at yonder poor man,” she said to her nurse; “yet if I were his
wife he would be greater really than my uncle, the king.”

The king, walking below in the garden, heard what she said.

“Say you so!” he called out. “Then we shall try if what you say is
true;” and he turned away, shaking with anger.

“Alas!” said the princess, “now, indeed, have I ruined myself for good
and all.”

Beppo was walking along the street looking about him hither and thither,
and thinking how fine it all was. He had no more thought that the king
and the princess were talking about him than the man in the moon.

Suddenly some one clapped him upon the shoulder.

Beppo turned around.

There stood a great tall man dressed all in black.

“You must come with me,” said he.

“What do you want with me?” said Beppo.

“That you shall see for yourself,” said the man.

“Very well,” said Beppo; “I’d as lief go along with you as anywhere
else.”

So he turned and followed the man whither he led.

They went along first one street and then another, and by-and-by they
came to the river, and there was a long wall with a gate in it. The tall
man in black knocked upon the gate, and some one opened it from within.
The man in black entered, and Beppo followed at his heels, wondering
where he was going.

He was in a garden. There were fruit trees and flowering shrubs and long
marble walks, and away in the distance a great grand palace of white
marble that shone red as fire in the light of the setting sun, but there
was not a soul to be seen anywhere.

The tall man in black led the way up the long marble walk, past the
fountains and fruit trees and beds of roses, until he had come to the
palace.

Beppo wondered whether he were dreaming.

The tall man in black led the way into the palace, but still there was
not a soul to be seen.

Beppo gazed about him in wonder. There were floors of colored marble,
and ceilings of blue and gold, and columns of carved marble, and
hangings of silk and velvet and silver.

Suddenly the tall man opened a little door that led into a dark passage,
and Beppo followed him. They went along the passage, and then the man
opened another door.

Then Beppo found himself in a great vaulted room. There at one end of
the room were three souls. A man sat on the throne, and he was the
king, for he had a crown on his head and a long robe over his shoulders.
Beside him stood a priest, and in front of him stood a beautiful young
woman as white as wax and as still as death.

Beppo wondered whether he were awake.

“Come hither,” said the king, in a harsh voice, and Beppo came forward
and kneeled before him. “Take this young woman by the hand,” said the
king.

Beppo did as he was bidden.

Her hand was as cold as ice.

Then, before Beppo knew what was happening, he found that he was being
married.

It was the princess.

“Now,” said the king to her when the priest had ended, and he frowned
until his brows were as black as thunder--“now you are married; tell me,
is your husband greater than I?”

But the princess said never a word, only the tears ran one after another
down her white face. The king sat staring at her and frowning.

Suddenly some one tapped Beppo upon the shoulder. It was the tall man in
black.

Beppo knew that he was to follow him again. This time the princess
was to go along. The tall man in black led the way, and Beppo and the
princess followed along the secret passage and up and down the stairs
until at last they came out into the garden again.

And now the evening was beginning to fall.

The man led the way down the garden to the river, and still Beppo and
the princess followed him.

By-and-by they came to the river-side and to a flight of steps, and
there was a little frail boat without sail or oars.

The tall man in black beckoned towards the boat, and Beppo knew that he
and princess were to enter it.

As soon as Beppo had helped the princess into the boat the tall man
thrust it out into the stream with his foot, and the boat drifted away
from the shore and out into the river, and then around and around. Then
it floated off down the stream.

It floated on and on, and the sun set and the moon rose.

Beppo looked at the princess, and he thought he had never seen any one
so beautiful in all his life. It was all like a dream, and he hoped he
might never waken. But the princess sat there weeping and weeping, and
said nothing.

The night fell darker and darker, but still Beppo sat looking at the
princess. Her face was as white as silver in the moonlight. The smell
of the flower-gardens came across the river. The boat floated on and on
until by-and-by it drifted to the shore again and among the river reeds,
and there it stopped, and Beppo carried the princess ashore.

“Listen,” said the princess. “Do you know who I am?”

“No,” said Beppo, “I do not.”

“I am the princess,” said she, “the king’s niece; and by rights I should
be queen of this land.”

Beppo could not believe his ears.

“It is true that I am married to you,” said she, “but never shall you be
my husband until you are king.”

“King!” said Beppo; “how can I be king?”

“You shall be king,” said the princess.

“But the king is everything,” said Beppo, “and I am nothing at all.”

“Great things come from small beginnings,” said the princess; “a big
tree from a little seed.”

Some little distance away from the river was the twinkle of a light, and
thither Beppo led the princess. When the two came to it, they found
it was a little hut, for there were fish-nets hanging outside in the
moonlight.

Beppo knocked.

An old woman opened the door. She stared and stared, as well she might,
to see the fine lady in silks and satins with a gold ring upon her
finger, and nobody with her but one who looked like a poor beggar-man.

“Who are you and what do you want?” said the old woman.

“Who we are,” said the princess, “does not matter, except that we are
honest folk in trouble. What we want is shelter for the night and food
to eat, and that we will pay for.”

“Shelter I can give you,” said the old woman, “but little else but a
crust of bread and a cup of water. One time there was enough and plenty
in the house; but now, since my husband has gone and I am left all
alone, it is little I have to eat and drink. But such as I have to give
you are welcome to.”

Then Beppo and the princess went into the house.

The next morning the princess called Beppo to her. “Here,” said she, “is
a ring and a letter. Go you into the town and inquire for Sebastian the
Goldsmith. He will know what to do.”

Beppo took the ring and the letter and started off to town, and it
was not hard for him to find the man he sought, for every one knew of
Sebastian the Goldsmith. He was an old man, with a great white beard and
a forehead like the dome of a temple. He looked at Beppo from head to
foot with eyes as bright as those of a snake; then he took the ring
and the letter. As soon as he saw the ring he raised it to his lips and
kissed it; then he kissed the letter also; then he opened it and read
it.

He turned to Beppo and bowed very low. “My lord,” said he, “I will do as
I am commanded. Will you be pleased to follow me?”

He led the way into an inner room. There were soft rugs upon the floor,
and around the walls were tapestries. There were couches and silken
cushions. Beppo wondered what it all meant.

Sebastian the Goldsmith clapped his hands together. A door opened, and
there came three black slaves into the room. The Goldsmith spoke to them
in a strange language, and the chief of the three black slaves bowed in
reply. Then he and the others led Beppo into another room where there
was a marble bath of tepid water. They bathed him and rubbed him with
soft linen towels; then they shaved the beard from his cheeks and chin
and trimmed his hair; then they clothed him in fine linen and a plain
suit of gray and Beppo looked like a new man.

Then when all this was done the chief of the blacks conducted Beppo back
to Sebastian the Goldsmith. There was a fine feast spread, with fruit
and wine. Beppo sat down to it, and Sebastian the Goldsmith stood and
served him with a napkin over his arm.

Then Beppo was to return to the princess again.

A milk-white horse was waiting for him at the Goldsmith’s door, a
servant holding the bridle, and Beppo mounted and rode away.

When he returned to the fisherman’s hut the princess was waiting for
him. She had prepared a tray spread with a napkin, a cup of milk, and
some sweet cakes.

“Listen,” said she; “to-day the king hunts in the forest over yonder. Go
you thither with this. The king will be hot and thirsty, and weary with
the chase. Offer him this refreshment. He will eat and drink, and in
gratitude he will offer you something in return. Take nothing of him,
but ask him this: that he allow you once every three days to come to the
palace, and that he whisper these words in your ear so that no one else
may hear them--‘A word, a word, only a few words; spoken ill, they are
ill; spoken well, they are more precious than gold and jewels.’”

“Why should I do that?” said Beppo.

“You will see,” said the princess.

Beppo did not understand it at all, but the princess is a princess and
must be obeyed, and so he rode away on his horse at her bidding.

It was as the princess had said: the king was hunting in the forest,
and when Beppo came there he could hear the shouts of the men and the
winding of horns and the baying of dogs. He waited there for maybe an
hour or more, and sometimes the sounds were nearer and sometimes the
sounds were farther away. Presently they came nearer and nearer, and
then all of a sudden the king came riding out of the forest, the hounds
hunting hither and thither, and the lords and nobles and courtiers
following him.

The king’s face was flushed and heated with the chase, and his forehead
was bedewed with sweat. Beppo came forward and offered the tray. The
king wiped his face with the napkin, and then drank the milk and ate
three of the cakes.

“Who was it ordered you to bring this to me?” said he to Beppo.

“No one,” said Beppo; “I brought it myself.”

The king looked at Beppo and was grateful to him.

“Thou hast given me pleasure and comfort,” said he; “ask what thou wilt
in return and if it is in reason thou shalt have it.”

“I will have only this,” said Beppo: “that your majesty will allow me
once every three days to come to the palace, and that then you will take
me aside and will whisper these words into my ear so that no one else
may hear them--A word, a word, only a few words; spoken ill, they are
ill; spoken well, they are more precious than gold and jewels.’”

The king burst out laughing. “Why,” said he, “what is this foolish thing
you ask of me? If you had asked for a hundred pieces of gold you should
have had them. Think better, friend, and ask something of more worth
than this foolish thing.”

“Please your majesty,” said Beppo, “I ask nothing else.”

The king laughed again. “Then you shall have what you ask,” said he, and
he rode away.

The next morning the princess said to Beppo: “This day you shall go and
claim the king’s promise of him. Take this ring and this letter again to
Sebastian the Goldsmith. He will fit you with clothes in which to appear
before the king. Then go to the king’s palace that he may whisper those
words he has to say into your ear.”

Once more Beppo went to Sebastian the Goldsmith, and the Goldsmith
kissed the princess’s ring and letter, and read what she had written.

Again the black slaves took Beppo to the bath, only this time they clad
him in a fine suit of velvet and hung a gold chain around his neck.
After that Sebastian the Goldsmith again served a feast to Beppo, and
waited upon him while he ate and drank.

In front of the house a noble horse, as black as jet, was waiting to
carry Beppo to the palace, and two servants dressed in velvet livery
were waiting to attend him.

So Beppo rode away, and many people stopped to look at him.

He came to the palace, and the king was giving audience. Beppo went into
the great audience-chamber. It was full of people--lords and nobles and
rich merchants and lawyers.

Beppo did not know how to come to the king, so he stood there and waited
and waited. The people looked at him and whispered to one another: “Who
is that young man?” “Whence comes he?” Then one said: “Is not he
the young man who served the king with cakes and milk in the forest
yesterday?”

Beppo stood there gazing at the king. By-and-by the king suddenly looked
up and caught sight of him. He gazed at Beppo for a moment or two and
then he knew him. Then he smiled and beckoned to him.

“Aye, my foolish benefactor,” said he, aloud, “is it thou, and art
thou come so soon to redeem thy promise? Very well; come hither, I have
something to say to thee.”

Beppo came forward, and everybody stared. He came close to the king, and
the king laid his hand upon his shoulder. Then he leaned over to Beppo
and whispered in his ear: “A word, a word, only a few words; if they be
spoken ill, they are ill; if they be spoken well, they are more precious
than gold and jewels.” Then he laughed. “Is that what you would have me
say?” said he.

“Yes, majesty,” said Beppo, and he bowed low and withdrew.

But, lo and behold, what a change!

Suddenly he was transformed in the eyes of the whole world. The crowd
drew back to allow him to pass, and everybody bowed low as he went
along.

“Did you not see the king whisper to him,” said one. “What could it be
that the king said?” said another. “This must be a new favorite,” said a
third.

He had come into the palace Beppo the Foolish; he went forth Beppo the
Great Man, and all because of a few words the king had whispered in his
ear.

Three days passed, and then Beppo went again to the Goldsmith’s with the
ring and a letter from the princess. This time Sebastian the Goldsmith
fitted him with a suit of splendid plum-colored silk and gave him a
dappled horse, and again Beppo and his two attendants rode away to the
palace. And this time every one knew him, and as he went up the steps
into the palace all present bowed to him. The king saw him as soon as he
appeared, and when he caught sight of him he burst out laughing.

“Aye,” said he, “I was looking for thee today, and wondering how soon
thou wouldst come. Come hither till I whisper something in thine ear.”

Then all the lords and nobles and courtiers and ministers drew back, and
Beppo went up to the king.

The king laughed and laughed. He laid his arm over Beppo’s shoulder,
and again he whispered in his ear: “A word, a word, only a few words; if
they be spoken ill, they are ill; if they be spoken well, they are more
precious than gold and jewels.”

Then he released Beppo, and Beppo withdrew.

So it continued for three months. Every three days Beppo went to the
palace, and the king whispered the words in his ear. Beppo said nothing
to any one, and always went away as soon as the king had whispered to
him.

Then at last the princess said to him: “Now the time is ripe for doing.
Listen! To-day when you go to the palace fix your eyes, when the
king speaks to you, upon the prime-minister, and shake your head. The
prime-minister will ask you what the king said. Say nothing to him but
this: Alas, my poor friend!’”

It was all just as the princess had said.

The king was walking in the garden, with his courtiers and ministers
about him. Beppo came to him, and the king, as he always did, laid his
hand upon Beppo’s shoulder and whispered in his ear: “A word, a word,
only a few words; if they be spoken ill, they are ill; if they be spoken
well, they are more precious than gold and jewels.”

While the king was saying these words to Beppo, Beppo was looking
fixedly at the prime-minister. While he did so he shook his head three
times. Then he bowed low and walked away.

He had not gone twenty paces before some one tapped him upon the arm;
it was the prime-minister. Beppo gazed fixedly at him. “Alas, my poor
friend!” said he.

The prime-minister turned pale. “It was, then, as I thought,” said he.
“The king spoke about me. Will you not tell me what he said?”

Beppo shook his head. “Alas, my poor friend!” said he, and then he
walked on.

The prime-minister still followed him.

“My lord,” said he, “I have been aware that his majesty has not been the
same to me for more than a week past. If it was about the princess, pray
tell his majesty that I meant nothing ill when I spoke of her to him.”

Beppo shook his head. “Alas, my poor friend!” he said.

The prime-minister’s lips trembled. “My lord,” said he, “I have always
had the kindest regard for you, and if there is anything in my power
that I can do for you I hope you will command me. I know how much you
are in his majesty’s confidence. Will you not speak a few words to set
the matter straight?”

Beppo again shook his head. “Alas, my poor friend!” said he, and then he
got upon his horse and rode away.

Three days passed.

“This morning,” said the princess, “when you go to the king, look at
the prime-minister when the king speaks to you, and smile. The
prime-minister will again speak to you, and this time say, It is well,
and I wish you joy.’ Take what he gives you, for it will be of use.”

Again all happened just as the princess said.

Beppo came to the palace, and again the king whispered in his ear. As
he did so Beppo looked at the prime-minister and smiled, and then he
withdrew.

The prime-minister followed him. He trembled. “It is well,” said Beppo,
“and I wish you joy.”

The prime-minister grasped his hand and wrung it. “My lord,” said he,
“how can I express my gratitude! The palace of my son that stands by the
river--I would that you would use it for your own, if I may be so bold
as to offer it to you.”

“I will,” said Beppo, “use it as my own.”

The prime-minister wrung his hand again, and then Beppo rode away.

The next time that Beppo spoke to the king, at the princess’s bidding,
he looked at the lord-treasurer, and said, as he had said to the
prime-minister, “Alas, my poor friend!”

When he rode away he left the lord-treasurer as white as ashes to the
very lips.

Three days passed, and then, while the king talked to Beppo, Beppo
looked at the lord-treasurer and smiled.

The lord-treasurer followed him to the door of the palace.

“It is well, and I wish you joy,” said Beppo.

The treasurer offered him a fortune.

The next time it was the same with the captain of the guards. First
Beppo pitied him, and then he wished him joy.

“My lord,” said the captain of the guards, “my services are yours at any
time.”

Then the same thing happened to the governor of the city, then to this
lord, and then to that lord.

Beppo grew rich and powerful beyond measure.

Then one day the princess said: “Now we will go into the town, and to
the palace of the prime-minister’s son, which the prime-minister gave
you, for the time is ripe for the end.”

In a few days all the court knew that Beppo was living like a prince in
the prime-minister’s palace. The king began to wonder what it all meant,
and how all such good-fortune had come to Beppo. He had grown very tired
of always speaking to Beppo the same words.

But Beppo was now great among the great; all the world paid court to
him, and bowed down to him, almost as they did before the king.

“Now,” said the princess, “the time has come to strike. Bid all the
councillors, and all the lords, and all the nobles to meet here three
days hence, for it is now or never that you shall win all and become
king.”

Beppo did as she bade. He asked all of the great people of the kingdom
to come to him, and they came. When they were all gathered together at
Beppo’s house, they found two thrones set as though for a king and a
queen, but there was no sign of Beppo, and everybody wondered what it
all meant.

Suddenly the door opened and Beppo came into the room, leading by the
hand a lady covered with a veil from head to foot.

Everybody stopped speaking and stood staring while Beppo led the veiled
lady up to one of the thrones. He seated himself upon the other.

The lady stood up and dropped her veil, and then every one knew her.

It was the princess. “Do you not know me?” said she; “I am the queen,
and this is my husband. He is your king.”

All stood silent for a moment, and then a great shout went up. “Long
live the queen! Long live the king!”

The princess turned to the captain of the guards. “You have offered your
services to my husband,” said she; “his commands and my commands are
that you march to the palace and cast out him who hath no right there.”

“It shall be done,” said the captain of the guards.

All the troops were up in arms, and the town was full of tumult and
confusion. About midnight they brought the false king before King Beppo
and the queen. The false king stood there trembling like a leaf. The
queen stood gazing at him steadily. “Behold, this is the husband that
thou gavest me,” said she. “It is as I said; he is greater than thou.
For, lo, he is king! What art thou?”

The false king was banished out of the country, and the poor fisherman’s
wife, who had entertained the princess for all this time, came to live
at the palace, where all was joy and happiness.


“Friend,” said St. George, “I like your story. Ne’th’less, tis like a
strolling peddler, in that it carries a great deal of ills to begin
with, to get rid of them all before it gets to the end of its journey.
However, tis as you say--it ends with everybody merry and feasting, and
so I like it. But now methinks our little friend yonder is big with a
story of his own;” and he pointed, as he spoke, with the stem of his
pipe to a little man whom I knew was the brave Tailor who had killed
seven flies at a blow, for he still had around his waist the belt with
the legend that he himself had worked upon it.

“Aye,” piped the Tailor in a keen, high voice, “tis true I have a story
inside of me. Tis about another tailor who had a great, big, black, ugly
demon to wait upon him and to sew his clothes for him.”

“And the name of that story, my friend,” said the Soldier who had
cheated the Devil, “is what?”

“It hath no name,” piped the little Tailor, “but I will give it one, and
it shall be--”




Woman’s Wit.

When man’s strength fails, woman’s wit prevails.

In the days when the great and wise King Solomon lived and ruled, evil
spirits and demons were as plentiful in the world as wasps in summer.

So King Solomon, who was so wise and knew so many potent spells that he
had power over evil such as no man has had before or since, set himself
to work to put those enemies of mankind out of the way. Some he conjured
into bottles, and sank into the depths of the sea; some he buried in
the earth; some he destroyed altogether, as one burns hair in a
candle-flame.

Now, one pleasant day when King Solomon was walking in his garden with
his hands behind his back, and his thoughts busy as bees with this or
that, he came face to face with a Demon, who was a prince of his kind.
“Ho, little man!” cried the evil spirit, in a loud voice, “art not thou
the wise King Solomon who conjures my brethren into brass chests and
glass bottles? Come, try a fall at wrestling with me, and whoever
conquers shall be master over the other for all time. What do you say to
such an offer as that?”

“I say aye!” said King Solomon, and, without another word, he stripped
off his royal robes and stood bare breasted, man to man with the other.

The world never saw the like of that wrestling match betwixt the king
and the Demon, for they struggled and strove together from the seventh
hour in the morning to the sunset in the evening, and during that time
the sky was clouded over as black as night, and the lightning forked
and shot, and the thunder roared and bellowed, and the earth shook and
quaked.

But at last the king gave the enemy an under twist, and flung him down
on the earth so hard that the apples fell from the trees; and then,
panting and straining, he held the evil one down, knee on neck.
Thereupon the sky presently cleared again, and all was as pleasant as a
spring day.

King Solomon bound the Demon with spells, and made him serve him for
seven years. First, he had him build a splendid palace, the like of
which was not to be seen within the bounds of the seven rivers; then he
made him set around the palace a garden, such as I for one wish I may
see some time or other. Then, when the Demon had done all that the king
wished, the king conjured him into a bottle, corked it tightly, and set
the royal seal on the stopper. Then he took the bottle a thousand miles
away into the wilderness, and, when no man was looking, buried it in the
ground, and this is the way the story begins.

Well, the years came and the years went, and the world grew older and
older, and kept changing (as all things do but two), so that by-and-by
the wilderness where King Solomon had hid the bottle became a great
town, with people coming and going, and all as busy as bees about their
own business and other folks’ affairs.

Among these towns-people was a little Tailor, who made clothes for many
a worse man to wear, and who lived all alone in a little house with no
one to darn his stockings for him, and no one to meddle with his coming
and going, for he was a bachelor.

The little Tailor was a thrifty soul, and by hook and crook had laid by
enough money to fill a small pot, and then he had to bethink himself of
some safe place to hide it. So one night he took a spade and a lamp and
went out in the garden to bury his money. He drove his spade into the
ground--and click! He struck something hard that rang under his foot
with a sound as of iron. “Hello!” said he, “what have we here?” and if
he had known as much as you and I do, he would have filled in the earth,
and tramped it down, and have left that plate of broth for somebody else
to burn his mouth with.

As it was, he scraped away the soil, and then he found a box of adamant,
with a ring in the lid to lift it by. The Tailor clutched the ring and
bent his back, and up came the box with the damp earth sticking to it.
He cleaned the mould away, and there he saw, written in red letters,
these words:

“Open not.”

You may be sure that after he had read these words he was not long in
breaking open the lid of the box with his spade.

Inside the first box he found a second, and upon it the same words:

“Open not.”

Within the second box was another, and within that still another, until
there were seven in all, and on each was written the same words:

“Open not.”

Inside the seventh box was a roll of linen, and inside that a bottle
filled with nothing but blue smoke; and I wish that bottle had burned
the Tailor’s fingers when he touched it.

“And is this all?” said the little Tailor, turning the bottle upside
down and shaking it, and peeping at it by the light of the lamp. “Well,
since I have gone so far I might as well open it, as I have already
opened the seven boxes.” Thereupon he broke the seal that stoppered it.

Pop! out flew the cork, and--puff! out came the smoke; not all at once,
but in a long thread that rose up as high as the stars, and then spread
until it hid their light.

The Tailor stared and goggled and gaped to see so much smoke come out of
such a little bottle, and, as he goggled and stared, the smoke began to
gather together again, thicker and thicker, and darker and darker, until
it was as black as ink. Then out from it there stepped one with eyes
that shone like sparks of fire, and who had a countenance so terrible
that the Tailor’s skin quivered and shrivelled, and his tongue clove to
the roof of his mouth at the sight of it.

“Who are thou?” said the terrible being, in a voice that made the very
marrow of the poor Tailor’s bones turn soft from terror.

“If you please, sir,” said he, “I am only a little tailor.”

The evil being lifted up both hands and eyes. “How wonderful,” he cried,
“that one little tailor can undo in a moment that which took the wise
Solomon a whole day to accomplish, and in the doing of which he wellnigh
broke the sinews of his heart!” Then, turning to the Tailor, who stood
trembling like a rabbit, “Hark thee!” said he. “For two thousand years
I lay there in that bottle, and no one came nigh to aid me. Thou hast
liberated me, and thou shalt not go unrewarded. Every morning at the
seventh hour I will come to thee, and I will perform for thee whatever
task thou mayst command me. But there is one condition attached to
the agreement, and woe be to thee if that condition is broken. If any
morning I should come to thee, and thou hast no task for me to do, I
shall wring thy neck as thou mightest wring the neck of a sparrow.”
 Thereupon he was gone in an instant, leaving the little Tailor half dead
with terror.

Now it happened that the prime-minister of that country had left an
order with the Tailor for a suit of clothes, so the next morning, when
the Demon came, the little man set him to work on the bench, with his
legs tucked up like a journey-man tailor. “I want,” said he, “such and
such a suit of clothes.”

“You shall have them,” said the Demon; and thereupon he began snipping
in the air, and cutting most wonderful patterns of silks and satins out
of nothing at all, and the little Tailor sat and gaped and stared. Then
the Demon began to drive the needle like a spark of fire--the like was
never seen in all the seven kingdoms, for the clothes seemed to make
themselves.

At last, at the end of a little while, the Demon stood up and brushed
his hands. “They are done,” said he, and thereupon he instantly
vanished. But the Tailor cared little for that, for upon the bench there
lay such a suit of clothes of silk and satin stuff, sewed with threads
of gold and silver and set with jewels, as the eyes of man never saw
before; and the Tailor packed them up and marched off with them himself
to the prime-minister.

The prime-minister wore the clothes to court that very day, and before
evening they were the talk of the town. All the world ran to the Tailor
and ordered clothes of him, and his fortune was made. Every day the
Demon created new suits of clothes out of nothing at all, so that the
Tailor grew as rich as a Jew, and held his head up in the world.

As time went along he laid heavier and heavier tasks upon the Demon’s
back, and demanded of him more and more; but all the while the Demon
kept his own counsel, and said never a word.

One morning, as the Tailor sat in his shop window taking the world
easy--for he had little or nothing to do now--he heard a great hubbub in
the street below, and when he looked down he saw that it was the king’s
daughter passing by. It was the first time that the Tailor had seen her,
and when he saw her his heart stood still within him, and then began
fluttering like a little bird, for one so beautiful was not to be met
with in the four corners of the world. Then she was gone.

All that day the little Tailor could do nothing but sit and think of the
princess, and the next morning when the Demon came he was thinking of
her still.

“What hast thou for me to do to-day?” said the Demon, as he always said
of a morning.

The little Tailor was waiting for the question.

“I would like you,” said he, “to send to the king’s palace, and to ask
him to let me have his daughter for my wife.”

“Thou shalt have thy desire,” said the Demon. Thereupon he smote his
hands together like a clap of thunder, and instantly the walls of the
room clove asunder, and there came out four-and-twenty handsome youths,
clad in cloth of gold and silver. After these four-and-twenty there came
another one who was the chief of them all, and before whom, splendid as
they were, the four-and-twenty paled like stars in daylight. “Go to the
king’s palace,” said the Demon to that one, “and deliver this message:
The Tailor of Tailors, the Master of Masters, and One Greater than a
King asks for his daughter to wife.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the other, and bowed his forehead to the
earth.

Never was there such a hubbub in the town as when those five-and-twenty,
in their clothes of silver and gold, rode through the streets to the
king’s palace. As they came near, the gates of the palace flew open
before them, and the king himself came out to meet them. The leader
of the five-and-twenty leaped from his horse, and, kissing the ground
before the king, delivered his message: “The Tailor of Tailors, the
Master of Masters, and One Greater than a King asks for thy daughter to
wife.”

When the king heard what the messenger said, he thought and pondered
a long time. At last he said, “If he who sent you is the Master of
Masters, and greater than a king, let him send me an asking gift such as
no king could send.”

“It shall be as you desire,” said the messenger, and thereupon the
five-and-twenty rode away as they had come, followed by crowds of
people.

The next morning when the Demon came the tailor was ready and waiting
for him. “What hast thou for me to do to-day?” said the Evil One.

“I want,” said the tailor, “a gift to send to the king such as no other
king could send him.”

“Thou shalt have thy desire,” said the Demon. Thereupon he smote his
hands together, and summoned, not five-and-twenty young men, but fifty
youths, all clad in clothes more splendid than the others.

All of the fifty sat upon coal-black horses, with saddles of silver and
housings of silk and velvet embroidered with gold. In the midst of all
the five-and-seventy there rode a youth in cloth of silver embroidered
in pearls. In his hand he bore something wrapped in a white napkin, and
that was the present for the king such as no other king could give. So
said the Demon: “Take it to the royal palace, and tell his majesty that
it is from the Tailor of Tailors, the Master of Masters, and One Greater
than a King.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the young man, and then they all rode away.

When they came to the palace the gates flew open before them, and
the king came out to meet them. The young man who bore the present
dismounted and prostrated himself in the dust, and, when the king bade
him arise, he unwrapped the napkin, and gave to the king a goblet
made of one single ruby, and filled to the brim with pieces of gold.
Moreover, the cup was of such a kind that whenever it was emptied of its
money it instantly became full again. “The Tailor of Tailors, the Master
of Masters, and One Greater than a King sends your majesty this goblet,
and bids me, his ambassador, to ask for your daughter,” said the young
man.

When the king saw what had been sent him he was filled with amazement.
“Surely,” said he to himself, “there can be no end to the power of one
who can give such a gift as this.” Then to the messenger, “Tell your
master that he shall have my daughter for his wife if he will build
over yonder a palace such as no man ever saw or no king ever lived in
before.”

“It shall be done,” said the young man, and then they all went away, as
the others had done the day before.

The next morning when the Demon appeared the Tailor was ready for him.
“Build me,” said he, “such and such a palace in such and such a place.”

And the Demon said, “It shall be done.” He smote his hands together, and
instantly there came a cloud of mist that covered and hid the spot where
the palace was to be built. Out from the cloud there came such a banging
and hammering and clapping and clattering as the people of that town
never heard before. Then when evening had come the cloud arose, and
there, where the king had pointed out, stood a splendid palace as white
as snow, with roofs and domes of gold and silver. As the king stood
looking and wondering at this sight, there came five hundred young men
riding, and one in the midst of all who wore a golden crown on his head,
and upon his body a long robe stiff with diamonds and pearls. “We come,”
 said he, “from the Tailor of Tailors, and Master of Masters, and One
Greater than a King, to ask you to let him have your daughter for his
wife.”

“Tell him to come!” cried the king, in admiration, “for the princess is
his.”

The next morning when the Demon came he found the Tailor dancing and
shouting for joy. “The princess is mine!” he cried, “so make me ready
for her.”

“It shall be done,” said the Demon, and thereupon he began to make the
Tailor ready for his wedding. He brought him to a marble bath of water,
in which he washed away all that was coarse and ugly, and from which the
little man came forth as beautiful as the sun. Then the Demon clad
him in the finest linen, and covered him with clothes such as even the
emperor of India never wore. Then he smote his hands together, and the
wall of the tailor-shop opened as it had done twice before, and there
came forth forty slaves clad in crimson, and bearing bowls full of money
in their hands. After them came two leading a horse as white as snow,
with a saddle of gold studded with diamonds and rubies and emeralds
and sapphires. After came a body-guard of twenty warriors clad in gold
armor. Then the Tailor mounted his horse and rode away to the king’s
palace, and as he rode the slaves scattered the money amongst the crowd,
who scrambled for it and cheered the Tailor to the skies.

That night the princess and the Tailor were married, and all the town
was lit with bonfires and fireworks. The two rode away in the midst of
a great crowd of nobles and courtiers to the palace which the Demon had
built for the Tailor; and, as the princess gazed upon him, she thought
that she had never beheld so noble and handsome a man as her husband. So
she and the Tailor were the happiest couple in the world.

But the next morning the Demon appeared as he had appeared ever since
the Tailor had let him out of the bottle, only now he grinned till his
teeth shone and his face turned black. “What hast thou for me to do?”
 said he, and at the words the Tailor’s heart began to quake, for he
remembered what was to happen to him when he could find the Demon no
more work to do--that his neck was to be wrung--and now he began to see
that he had all that he could ask for in the world. Yes; what was there
to ask for now?

“I have nothing more for you to do,” said he to the Demon; “you have
done all that man could ask--you may go now.”

“Go!” cried the Demon, “I shall not go until I have done all that I have
to do. Give me work, or I shall wring your neck.” And his fingers began
to twitch.

Then the Tailor began to see into what a net he had fallen. He began to
tremble like one in an ague. He turned his eyes up and down, for he
did not know where to look for aid. Suddenly, as he looked out of the
window, a thought struck him. “Maybe,” thought he, “I can give the Demon
such a task that even he cannot do it. Yes, yes!” he cried, “I have
thought of something for you to do. Make me out yonder in front of my
palace a lake of water a mile long and a mile wide, and let it be
lined throughout with white marble, and filled with water as clear as
crystal.”

“It shall be done,” said the Demon. As he spoke he spat in the air,
and instantly a thick fog arose from the earth and hid everything from
sight. Then presently from the midst of the fog there came a great
noise of chipping and hammering, of digging and delving, of rushing and
gurgling. All day the noise and the fog continued, and then at sunset
the one ceased and the other cleared away. The poor Tailor looked out
the window, and when he saw what he saw his teeth chattered in his head,
for there was a lake a mile long and a mile broad, lined within with
white marble, and filled with water as clear as crystal, and he knew
that the Demon would come the next morning for another task to do.

That night he slept little or none, and when the seventh hour of the
morning came the castle began to rock and tremble, and there stood the
Demon, and his hair bristled and his eyes shone like sparks of fire.
“What hast thou for me to do?” said he, and the poor Tailor could do
nothing but look at him with a face as white as dough.

“What hast thou for me to do?” said the Demon again, and then at last
the Tailor found his wits and his tongue from sheer terror. “Look!” said
he, “at the great mountain over yonder; remove it, and make in its place
a level plain with fields and orchards and gardens.” And he thought to
himself when he had spoken, “Surely, even the Demon cannot do that.”

“It shall be done,” said the Demon, and, so saying, he stamped his heel
upon the ground. Instantly the earth began to tremble and quake, and
there came a great rumbling like the sound of thunder. A cloud of
darkness gathered in the sky, until at last all was as black as the
blackest midnight. Then came a roaring and a cracking and a crashing,
such as man never heard before. All day it continued, until the time
of the setting of the sun, when suddenly the uproar ceased, and the
darkness cleared away; and when the Tailor looked out of the window
the mountain was gone, and in its place were fields and orchards and
gardens.

It was very beautiful to see, but when the Tailor beheld it his knees
began to smite together, and the sweat ran down his face in streams. All
that night he walked up and down and up and down, but he could not think
of one other task for the Demon to do.

When the next morning came the Demon appeared like a whirlwind. His
face was as black as ink and smoke, and sparks of fire flew from his
nostrils.

“What have you for me to do?” cried he.

“I have nothing for you to do!” piped the poor Tailor.

“Nothing?” cried the Demon.

“Nothing.”

“Then prepare to die.”

“Stop!” cried the Tailor, falling on his knees, “let me first see my
wife.”

“So be it,” said the Demon, and if he had been wiser he would have said
“No.”

When the Tailor came to the princess, he flung himself on his face, and
began to weep and wail. The princess asked him what was the matter, and
at last, by dint of question, got the story from him, piece by piece.
When she had it all she began laughing. “Why did you not come to me
before?” said she, “instead of making all this trouble and uproar for
nothing at all? I will give the Monster a task to do.” She plucked a
single curling hair from her head. “Here,” said she, “let him take this
hair and make it straight.”

The Tailor was full of doubt; nevertheless, as there was nothing better
to do, he took it to the Demon.

“Hast thou found me a task to do?” cried the Demon.

“Yes,” said the Tailor. “It is only a little thing. Here is a hair from
my wife’s head; take it and make it straight.”

When the Demon heard what was the task that the Tailor had set him to do
he laughed aloud; but that was because he did not know. He took the
hair and stroked it between his thumb and finger, and, when he done, it
curled more than ever. Then he looked serious, and slapped it between
his palms, and that did not better matters, for it curled as much as
ever. Then he frowned, and, began beating the hair with his palm upon
his knees, and that only made it worse. All that day he labored and
strove at his task trying to make that one little hair straight, and,
when the sun set, there was the hair just as crooked as ever. Then, as
the great round sun sank red behind the trees, the Demon knew that he
was beaten. “I am conquered! I am conquered!” he howled, and flew away,
bellowing so dreadfully that all the world trembled.

So ends the story, with only this to say:

Where man’s strength fails, woman’s wit prevails.

For, to my mind, the princess--not to speak of her husband the little
Tailor--did more with a single little hair and her mother wit than King
Solomon with all his wisdom.


“Whose turn is it next to tell us a story?” said Sindbad the Sailor.

“Twas my turn,” said St. George; “but here be two ladies present, and
neither hath so much as spoken a word of a story for all this time. If
you, madam,” said he to Cinderella, “will tell us a tale, I will gladly
give up my turn to you.”

The Soldier who cheated the Devil took the pipe out of his mouth and
puffed away a cloud of smoke. “Aye,” said he, “always remember the
ladies, say I. That is a soldier’s trade.”

“Very well, then; if it is your pleasure,” said Cinderella. “I will tell
you a story, and it shall be of a friend of mine and of how she looked
after her husband’s luck. She was,” said Cinderella, “a princess, and
her father was a king.”

“And what is your story about?” said Sindbad the Sailor.

“It is,” said Cinderella, “about--”




A Piece of Good Luck

There were three students who were learning all that they could. The
first was named Joseph, the second was named John, and the third was
named Jacob Stuck. They studied seven long years under a wise master,
and in that time they learned all that their master had to teach them
of the wonderful things he knew. They learned all about geometry,
they learned all about algebra, they learned all about astronomy, they
learned all about the hidden arts, they learned all about everything,
except how to mend their own hose and where to get cabbage to boil in
the pot.

And now they were to go out into the world to practice what they knew.
The master called the three students to him--the one named Joseph, the
second named John, and the third named Jacob Stuck--and said he to them,
said he: “You have studied faithfully and have learned all that I have
been able to teach you, and now you shall not go out into the world with
nothing at all. See; here are three glass balls, and that is one for
each of you. Their like is not to be found in the four corners of the
world. Carry the balls wherever you go, and when one of them drops to
the ground, dig, and there you will certainly find a treasure.”

So the three students went out into the wide world.

Well, they travelled on and on for day after day, each carrying his
glass ball with him wherever he went. They travelled on and on for I
cannot tell how long, until one day the ball that Joseph carried slipped
out of his fingers and fell to the ground. “I’ve found a treasure!”
 cried Joseph, “I’ve found a treasure!”

The three students fell to work scratching and digging where the ball
had fallen, and by-and-by they found something. It was a chest with an
iron ring in the lid. It took all three of them to haul it up out of
the ground, and when they did so they found it was full to the brim of
silver money.

Were they happy? Well, they were happy! They danced around and around
the chest, for they had never seen so much money in all their lives
before. “Brothers,” said Joseph, in exultation, “here is enough for all
hands, and it shall be share and share alike with us, for haven’t we
studied seven long years together?” And so for a while they were as
happy as happy could be.

But by-and-by a flock of second thoughts began to buzz in the heads
of John and Jacob Stuck. “Why,” said they, “as for that, to be sure, a
chest of silver money is a great thing for three students to find who
had nothing better than book-learning to help them along; but who knows
but that there is something better even than silver money out in the
wide world?” So, after all, and in spite of the chest of silver money
they had found, the two of them were for going on to try their fortunes
a little farther. And as for Joseph, why, after all, when he came to
think of it, he was not sorry to have his chest of silver money all to
himself.

So the two travelled on and on for a while, here and there and
everywhere, until at last it was John’s ball that slipped out of his
fingers and fell to the ground. They digged where it fell, and this time
it was a chest of gold money they found.

Yes, a chest of gold money! A chest of real gold money! They just stood
and stared and stared, for if they had not seen it they would not have
believed that such a thing could have been in the world. “Well, Jacob
Stuck,” said John, “it was well to travel a bit farther than poor Joseph
did, was it not? What is a chest of silver money to such a treasure as
this? Come, brother, here is enough to make us both rich for all the
rest of our lives. We need look for nothing better than this.”

But no; by-and-by Jacob Stuck began to cool down again, and now that
second thoughts were coming to him he would not even be satisfied with a
half-share of a chest of gold money. No; maybe there might be something
better than even a chest full of gold money to be found in the world.
As for John, why, after all, he was just as well satisfied to keep
his treasure for himself. So the two shook hands, and then Jacob Stuck
jogged away alone, leaving John stuffing his pockets and his hat full of
gold money, and I should have liked to have been there, to have had my
share.

Well, Jacob Stuck jogged on and on by himself, until after a while he
came to a great, wide desert, where there was not a blade or a stick to
be seen far or near. He jogged on and on, and he wished he had not
come there. He jogged on and on when all of a sudden the glass ball he
carried slipped out of his fingers and fell to the ground.

“Aha!” said he to himself, “now maybe I shall find some great treasure
compared to which even silver and gold are as nothing at all.”

He digged down into the barren earth of the desert; and he digged and he
digged, but neither silver nor gold did he find. He digged and digged;
and by-and-by, at last, he did find something. And what was it? Why,
nothing but something that looked like a piece of blue glass not a
big bigger than my thumb. “Is that all?” said Jacob Stuck. “And have I
travelled all this weary way and into the blinding desert only for this?
Have I passed by silver and gold enough to make me rich for all my life,
only to find a little piece of blue glass?”

Jacob Stuck did not know what he had found. I shall tell you what it
was. It was a solid piece of good luck without flaw or blemish, and it
was almost the only piece I ever heard tell of. Yes; that was what it
was--a solid piece of good luck; and as for Jacob Stuck, why, he was
not the first in the world by many and one over who has failed to know
a piece of good luck when they have found it. Yes; it looked just like a
piece of blue glass no bigger than my thumb, and nothing else.

“Is that all?” said Jacob Stuck. “And have I travelled all this weary
way and into the blinding desert only for this? Have I passed by silver
and gold enough to make me rich for all my life, only to find a little
piece of blue glass?”

He looked at the bit of glass, and he turned it over and over in his
hand. It was covered with dirt. Jacob Stuck blew his breath upon it, and
rubbed it with his thumb.

Crack! dong! bang! smash!

Upon my word, had a bolt of lightning burst at Jacob Stuck’s feet he
could not have been more struck of a heap. For no sooner had he rubbed
the glass with his thumb than with a noise like a clap of thunder there
instantly stood before him a great, big man, dressed in clothes as red
as a flame, and with eyes that shone sparks of fire. It was the Genie of
Good Luck. It nearly knocked Jacob Stuck off his feet to see him there
so suddenly.

“What will you have?” said the Genie. “I am the slave of good luck.
Whosoever holds that piece of crystal in his hand him must I obey in
whatsoever he may command.”

“Do you mean that you are my servant and that I am your master?” said
Jacob Stuck.

“Yes; command and I obey.”

“Why, then,” said Jacob Stuck, “I would like you to help me out of this
desert place, if you can do so, for it is a poor spot for any Christian
soul to be.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie, and, before Jacob Stuck knew what
had happened to him, the Genie had seized him and was flying with him
through the air swifter than the wind. On and on he flew, and the earth
seemed to slide away beneath. On and on flew the flame-colored Genie
until at last he set Jacob down in a great meadow where there was a
river. Beyond the river were the white walls and grand houses of the
king’s town.

“Hast thou any further commands?” said the Genie.

“Tell me what you can do for me?” said Jacob Stuck.

“I can do whatsoever thou mayest order me to do,” said the Genie.

“Well, then,” said Jacob Stuck, “I think first of all I would like to
have plenty of money to spend.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie, and, as he spoke, he reached up
into the air and picked out a purse from nothing at all. “Here,” said
he, “is the purse of fortune; take from it all that thou needest and
yet it will always be full. As long as thou hast it thou shalt never be
lacking riches.”

“I am very much obliged to you,” said Jacob Stuck. “I’ve learned
geometry and algebra and astronomy and the hidden arts, but I never
heard tell of anything like this before.”

So Jacob Stuck went into the town with all the money he could spend, and
such a one is welcome anywhere. He lacked nothing that money could buy.
He bought himself a fine house; he made all the friends he wanted,
and more; he lived without a care, and with nothing to do but to enjoy
himself. That was what a bit of good luck did for him.

Now the princess, the daughter of the king of that town, was the most
beautiful in all the world, but so proud and haughty that her like was
not to be found within the bounds of all the seven rivers. So proud
was she and so haughty that she would neither look upon a young man
nor allow any young man to look upon her. She was so particular that
whenever she went out to take a ride a herald was sent through the
town with a trumpet ordering that every house should be closed and that
everybody should stay within doors, so that the princess should run no
risk of seeing a young man, or that no young man by chance should see
her.

One day the herald went through the town blowing his trumpet and calling
in a great, loud voice: “Close your doors! Close your windows! Her
highness, the princess, comes to ride; let no man look upon her on pain
of death!”

Thereupon everybody began closing their doors and windows, and, as it
was with the others, so it was with Jacob Stuck’s house; it had, like
all the rest, to be shut up as tight as a jug.

But Jacob Stuck was not satisfied with that; not he. He was for seeing
the princess, and he was bound he would do so. So he bored a hole
through the door, and when the princess came riding by he peeped out at
her.

Jacob Stuck thought he had never seen anyone so beautiful in all his
life. It was like the sunlight shining in his eyes, and he almost
sneezed. Her cheeks were like milk and rose-leaves, and her hair like
fine threads of gold. She sat in a golden coach with a golden crown
upon her head, and Jacob Stuck stood looking and looking until his heart
melted within him like wax in the oven. Then the princess was gone, and
Jacob Stuck stood there sighing and sighing.

“Oh, dear! Dear!” said he, “what shall I do? For, proud as she is, I
must see her again or else I will die of it.”

All that day he sat sighing and thinking about the beautiful princess,
until the evening had come. Then he suddenly thought of his piece of
good luck. He pulled his piece of blue glass out of his pocket and
breathed upon it and rubbed it with his thumb, and instantly the Genie
was there.

This time Jacob Stuck was not frightened at all.

“What are thy commands, O master?” said the Genie.

“O Genie!” said Jacob Stuck, “I have seen the princess to-day, and it
seems to me that there is nobody like her in all the world. Tell me,
could you bring her here so that I might see her again?”

“Yes,” said the Genie, “I could.”

“Then do so,” said Jacob Stuck, “and I will have you prepare a grand
feast, and have musicians to play beautiful music, for I would have the
princess sup with me.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie. As he spoke he smote his hands
together, and instantly there appeared twenty musicians, dressed in
cloth of gold and silver. With them they brought hautboys and fiddles,
big and little, and flageolets and drums and horns, and this and that to
make music with. Again the Genie smote his hands together, and instantly
there appeared fifty servants dressed in silks and satins and spangled
with jewels, who began to spread a table with fine linen embroidered
with gold, and to set plates of gold and silver upon it. The Genie smote
his hands together a third time, and in answer there came six servants.
They led Jacob Stuck into another room, where there was a bath of musk
and rose-water. They bathed him in the bath and dressed him in clothes
like an emperor, and when he came out again his face shone, and he was
as handsome as a picture.

Then by-and-by he knew that the princess was coming, for suddenly there
was the sound of girls’ voices singing and the twanging of stringed
instruments. The door flew open, and in came a crowd of beautiful girls,
singing and playing music, and after them the princess herself, more
beautiful than ever. But the proud princess was frightened! Yes, she
was. And well she might be, for the Genie had flown with her through the
air from the palace, and that is enough to frighten anybody. Jacob Stuck
came to her all glittering and shining with jewels and gold, and took
her by the hand. He led her up the hall, and as he did so the musicians
struck up and began playing the most beautiful music in the world. Then
Jacob Stuck and the princess sat down to supper and began eating and
drinking, and Jacob Stuck talked of all the sweetest things he could
think of. Thousands of wax candles made the palace bright as day, and as
the princess looked about her she thought she had never seen anything so
fine in all the world. After they had eaten their supper and ended with
a dessert of all kinds of fruits and of sweetmeats, the door opened and
there came a beautiful young serving-lad, carrying a silver tray, upon
which was something wrapped in a napkin. He kneeled before Jacob Stuck
and held the tray, and from the napkin Jacob Stuck took a necklace of
diamonds, each stone as big as a pigeon’s egg.

“This is to remind you of me,” said Jacob Stuck, “when you have gone
home again.” And as he spoke he hung it around the princess’s neck.

Just then the clock struck twelve.

Hardly had the last stroke sounded when every light was snuffed out, and
all was instantly dark and still. Then, before she had time to think,
the Genie of Good Luck snatched the princess up once more and flew back
to the palace more swiftly than the wind. And, before the princess knew
what had happened to her, there she was.

It was all so strange that the princess might have thought it was a
dream, only for the necklace of diamonds, the like of which was not to
be found in all the world.

The next morning there was a great buzzing in the palace, you may be
sure. The princess told all about how she had been carried away during
the night, and had supped in such a splendid palace, and with such
a handsome man dressed like an emperor. She showed her necklace of
diamonds, and the king and his prime-minister could not look at it or
wonder at it enough. The prime-minister and the king talked and talked
the matter over together, and every now and then the proud princess put
in a word of her own.

“Anybody,” said the prime-minister, “can see with half an eye that it is
all magic, or else it is a wonderful piece of good luck. Now, I’ll tell
you what shall be done,” said he: “the princess shall keep a piece of
chalk by her; and, if she is carried away again in such a fashion, she
shall mark a cross with the piece of chalk on the door of the house to
which she is taken. Then we shall find the rogue that is playing such a
trick, and that quickly enough.”

“Yes,” said the king; “that is very good advice.”

“I will do it,” said the princess.

All that day Jacob Stuck sat thinking and thinking about the beautiful
princess. He could not eat a bite, and he could hardly wait for the
night to come. As soon as it had fallen, he breathed upon his piece of
glass and rubbed his thumb upon it, and there stood the Genie of Good
Luck.

“I’d like the princess here again,” said he, “as she was last night,
with feasting and drinking, such as we had before.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie.

And as it had been the night before, so it was now. The Genie brought
the princess, and she and Jacob Stuck feasted together until nearly
midnight. Then, again, the door opened, and the beautiful servant-lad
came with the tray and something upon it covered with a napkin. Jacob
Stuck unfolded the napkin, and this time it was a cup made of a single
ruby, and filled to the brim with gold money. And the wonder of the
cup was this: that no matter how much money you took out of it, it was
always full. “Take this,” said Jacob Stuck, “to remind you of me.” Then
the clock struck twelve, and instantly all was darkness, and the Genie
carried the princess home again.

But the princess had brought her piece of chalk with her, as the
prime-minister had advised; and in some way or other she contrived,
either in coming or going, to mark a cross upon the door of Jacob
Stuck’s house.

But, clever as she was, the Genie of Good Luck was more clever still. He
saw what the princess did; and, as soon as he had carried her home, he
went all through the town and marked a cross upon every door, great and
small, little and big, just as the princess had done upon the door of
Jacob Stuck’s house, only upon the prime-minister’s door he put two
crosses. The next morning everybody was wondering what all the crosses
on the house-doors meant, and the king and the prime-minister were no
wiser than they had been before.

But the princess had brought the ruby cup with her, and she and the king
could not look at it and wonder at it enough.

“Pooh!” said the prime-minister; “I tell you it is nothing else in the
world but just a piece of good luck--that is all it is. As for the
rogue who is playing all these tricks, let the princess keep a pair of
scissors by her, and, if she is carried away again, let her contrive
to cut off a lock of his hair from over the young man’s right ear. Then
to-morrow we will find out who has been trimmed.”

Yes, the princess would do that; so, before evening was come, she tied a
pair of scissors to her belt.

Well, Jacob Stuck could hardly wait for the night to come to summon the
Genie of Good Luck. “I want to sup with the princess again,” said he.

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie of Good Luck; and, as soon as he
had made everything ready, away he flew to fetch the princess again.

Well, they feasted and drank, and the music played, and the candles were
as bright as day, and beautiful girls sang and danced, and Jacob Stuck
was as happy as a king. But the princess kept her scissors by her, and,
when Jacob Stuck was not looking, she contrived to snip off a lock of
his hair from over his right ear, and nobody saw what was done but the
Genie of Good Luck.

And it came towards midnight.

Once more the door opened, and the beautiful serving-lad came into the
room, carrying the tray of silver with something upon it wrapped in a
napkin. This time Jacob Stuck gave the princess an emerald ring for a
keepsake, and the wonder of it was that every morning two other rings
just like it would drop from it.

Then twelve o’clock sounded, the lights went out, and the Genie took the
princess home again.

But the Genie had seen what the princess had done. As soon as he had
taken her safe home, he struck his palms together and summoned all his
companions. “Go,” said he, “throughout the town and trim a lock of hair
from over the right ear of every man in the whole place;” and so they
did, from the king himself to the beggar-man at the gates. As for the
prime-minister, the Genie himself trimmed two locks of hair from him,
one from over each of his ears, so that the next morning he looked as
shorn as an old sheep. In the morning all the town was in a hubbub, and
everybody was wondering how all the men came to have their hair clipped
as it was. But the princess had brought the lock of Jacob Stuck’s hair
away with her wrapped up in a piece of paper, and there it was.

As for the ring Jacob Stuck had given to her, why, the next morning
there were three of them, and the king thought he had never heard tell
of such a wonderful thing.

“I tell you,” said the prime-minister, “there is nothing in it but a
piece of good luck, and not a grain of virtue. It’s just a piece of good
luck--that’s all it is.”

“No matter,” said the king; “I never saw the like of it in all my life
before. And now, what are we going to do?”

The prime-minister could think of nothing.

Then the princess spoke up. “Your majesty,” she said, “I can find the
young man for you. Just let the herald go through the town and proclaim
that I will marry the young man to whom this lock of hair belongs, and
then we will find him quickly enough.”

“What!” cried the prime-minister; “will, then, the princess marry a man
who has nothing better than a little bit of good luck to help him along
in the world?”

“Yes,” said the princess, “I shall if I can find him.”

So the herald was sent out around the town proclaiming that the princess
would marry the man to whose head belonged the lock of hair that she
had.

A lock of hair! Why, every man had lost a lock of hair! Maybe the
princess could fit it on again, and then the fortune of him to whom it
belonged would be made. All the men in the town crowded up to the king’s
palace. But all for no use, for never a one of them was fitted with his
own hair.

As for Jacob Stuck, he too had heard what the herald had proclaimed.
Yes; he too had heard it, and his heart jumped and hopped within him
like a young lamb in the spring-time. He knew whose hair it was the
princess had. Away he went by himself, and rubbed up his piece of blue
glass, and there stood the Genie.

“What are thy commands?” said he.

“I am,” said Jacob Stuck, “going up to the king’s palace to marry the
princess, and I would have a proper escort.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie.

He smote his hands together, and instantly there appeared a score of
attendants who took Jacob Stuck, and led him into another room, and
began clothing him in a suit so magnificent that it dazzled the eyes to
look at it. He smote his hands together again, and out in the court-yard
there appeared a troop of horsemen to escort Jacob Stuck to the palace,
and they were all clad in gold-and-silver armor. He smote his hands
together again, and there appeared twenty-and-one horses--twenty as
black as night and one as white as milk, and it twinkled and sparkled
all over with gold and jewels, and at the head of each horse of the
one-and-twenty horses stood a slave clad in crimson velvet to hold the
bridle. Again he smote his hands together, and there appeared in the
ante-room twenty handsome young men, each with a marble bowl filled with
gold money, and when Jacob Stuck came out dressed in his fine clothes
there they all were.

Jacob Stuck mounted upon the horse as white as milk, the young
men mounted each upon one of the black horses, the troopers in the
gold-and-silver armor wheeled their horses, the trumpets blew, and away
they rode--such a sight as was never seen in that town before, when they
had come out into the streets. The young men with the basins scattered
the gold money to the people, and a great crowd ran scrambling after,
and shouted and cheered.

So Jacob Stuck rode up to the king’s palace, and the king himself came
out to meet him with the princess hanging on his arm.

As for the princess, she knew him the moment she laid eyes on him. She
came down the steps, and set the lock of hair against his head, where
she had trimmed it off the night before, and it fitted and matched
exactly. “This is the young man,” said she, “and I will marry him, and
none other.”

But the prime-minister whispered and whispered in the king’s ear: “I
tell you this young man is nobody at all,” said he, “but just some
fellow who has had a little bit of good luck.”

“Pooh!” said the king, “stuff and nonsense! Just look at all the gold
and jewels and horses and men. What will you do,” said he to Jacob
Stuck, “if I let you marry the princess?”

“I will,” said Jacob Stuck, “build for her the finest palace that ever
was seen in all this world.”

“Very well,” said the king, “yonder are those sand hills over there. You
shall remove them and build your palace there. When it is finished you
shall marry the princess.” For if he does that, thought the king to
himself, it is something better than mere good luck.

“It shall,” said Jacob Stuck, “be done by tomorrow morning.”

Well, all that day Jacob Stuck feasted and made merry at the king’s
palace, and the king wondered when he was going to begin to build his
palace. But Jacob Stuck said nothing at all; he just feasted and drank
and made merry. When night had come, however, it was all different. Away
he went by himself, and blew his breath upon his piece of blue glass,
and rubbed it with his thumb. Instantly there stood the Genie before
him. “What wouldst thou have?” said he.

“I would like,” said Jacob Stuck, “to have the sand hills over yonder
carried away, and a palace built there of white marble and gold and
silver, such as the world never saw before. And let there be gardens
planted there with flowering plants and trees, and let there be
fountains and marble walks. And let there be servants and attendants
in the palace of all sorts and kinds--men and women. And let there be
a splendid feast spread for to-morrow morning, for then I am going to
marry the princess.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie, and instantly he was gone.

All night there was from the sand hills a ceaseless sound as of
thunder--a sound of banging and clapping and hammering and sawing and
calling and shouting. All that night the sounds continued unceasingly,
but at daybreak all was still, and when the sun arose there stood the
most splendid palace it ever looked down upon; shining as white as
snow, and blazing with gold and silver. All around it were gardens and
fountains and orchards. A great highway had been built between it and
the king’s palace, and all along the highway a carpet of cloth of gold
had been spread for the princess to walk upon.

Dear! Dear! How all the town stared with wonder when they saw such a
splendid palace standing where the day before had been nothing but naked
sand hills! The folk flocked in crowds to see it, and all the country
about was alive with people coming and going. As for the king, he could
not believe his eyes when he saw it. He stood with the princess and
looked and looked. Then came Jacob Stuck. “And now,” said he, “am I to
marry the princess?”

“Yes,” cried the king in admiration, “you are!”

So Jacob Stuck married the princess, and a splendid wedding it was. That
was what a little bit of good luck did for him.

After the wedding was over, it was time to go home to the grand new
palace. Then there came a great troop of horsemen with shining armor and
with music, sent by the Genie to escort Jacob Stuck and the princess and
the king and the prime-minister to Jacob Stuck’s new palace. They rode
along over the carpet of gold, and such a fine sight was never seen
in that land before. As they drew near to the palace a great crowd of
servants, clad in silks and satins and jewels, came out to meet them,
singing and dancing and playing on harps and lutes. The king and the
princess thought that they must be dreaming.

“All this is yours,” said Jacob Stuck to the princess; and he was that
fond of her, he would have given her still more if he could have thought
of anything else.

Jacob Stuck and the princess, and the king and the prime-minister, all
went into the palace, and there was a splendid feast spread in plates of
pure gold and silver, and they all four sat down together.

But the prime-minister was as sour about it all as a crab-apple. All the
time they were feasting he kept whispering and whispering in the king’s
ear. “It is all stuff and nonsense,” said he, “for such a man as Jacob
Stuck to do all this by himself. I tell you, it is all a piece of good
luck, and not a bit of merit in it.”

He whispered and whispered, until at last the king up and spoke. “Tell
me, Jacob Stuck,” he said, “where do you get all these fine things?”

“It all comes of a piece of good luck,” said Jacob Stuck.

“That is what I told you,” said the prime-minister.

“A piece of good luck!” said the king. “Where did you come across such a
piece of good luck?”

“I found it,” said Jacob Stuck.

“Found it!” said the king; “and have you got it with you now?”

“Yes, I have,” said Jacob Stuck; “I always carry it about with me;” and
he thrust his hand into his pocket and brought out his piece of blue
crystal.

“That!” said the king. “Why, that is nothing but a piece of blue glass!”

“That,” said Jacob Stuck, “is just what I thought till I found out
better. It is no common piece of glass, I can tell you. You just breathe
upon it so, and rub your thumb upon it thus, and instantly a Genie
dressed in red comes to do all that he is bidden. That is how it is.”

“I should like to see it,” said the king.

“So you shall,” said Jacob Stuck; “here it is,” said he; and he reached
it across the table to the prime-minister to give it to the king.

Yes, that was what he did; he gave it to the prime-minister to give it
to the king. The prime-minister had been listening to all that had been
said, and he knew what he was about. He took what Jacob Stuck gave him,
and he had never had such a piece of luck come to him before.

And did the prime-minister give it to the king, as Jacob Stuck had
intended? Not a bit of it. No sooner had he got it safe in his hand,
than he blew his breath upon it and rubbed it with his thumb.

Crack! dong! boom! crash!

There stood the Genie, like a flash and as red as fire. The princess
screamed out and nearly fainted at the sight, and the poor king sat
trembling like a rabbit.

“Whosoever possesses that piece of blue crystal,” said the Genie, in a
terrible voice, “him must I obey. What are thy commands?”

“Take this king,” cried the prime-minister, “and take Jacob Stuck, and
carry them both away into the farthest part of the desert whence the
fellow came.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie; and instantly he seized the
king in one hand and Jacob Stuck in the other, and flew away with them
swifter than the wind. On and on he flew, and the earth seemed to slide
away beneath them like a cloud. On and on he flew until he had come to
the farthest part of the desert. There he sat them both down, and it was
as pretty a pickle as ever the king or Jacob Stuck had been in, in all
of their lives. Then the Genie flew back again whence he had come.

There sat the poor princess crying and crying, and there sat the
prime-minister trying to comfort her. “Why do you cry?” said he; “why
are you afraid of me? I will do you no harm. Listen,” said he; “I will
use this piece of good luck in a way that Jacob Stuck would never have
thought of. I will make myself king. I will conquer the world, and make
myself emperor over all the earth. Then I will make you my queen.”

But the poor princess cried and cried.

“Hast thou any further commands?” said the Genie.

“Not now,” said the prime-minister; “you may go now;” and the Genie
vanished like a puff of smoke.

But the princess cried and cried.

The prime-minister sat down beside her. “Why do you cry?” said he.

“Because I am afraid of you,” said she.

“And why are you afraid of me?” said he.

“Because of that piece of blue glass. You will rub it again, and then
that great red monster will come again to frighten me.”

“I will rub it no more,” said he.

“Oh, but you will,” said she; “I know you will.”

“I will not,” said he.

“But I can’t trust you,” said she “as long as you hold it in your hand.”

“Then I will lay it aside,” said he, and so he did. Yes, he did; and he
is not the first man who has thrown aside a piece of good luck for the
sake of a pretty face. “Now are you afraid of me?” said he.

“No, I am not,” said she; and she reached out her hand as though to give
it to him. But, instead of doing so, she snatched up the piece of blue
glass as quick as a flash.

“Now,” said she, “it is my turn;” and then the prime-minister knew that
his end had come.

She blew her breath upon the piece of blue glass and rubbed her thumb
upon it. Instantly, as with a clap of thunder, the great red Genie stood
before her, and the poor prime-minister sat shaking and trembling.

“Whosoever hath that piece of blue crystal,” said the Genie, “that one
must I obey. What are your orders, O princess?”

“Take this man,” cried the princess, “and carry him away into the desert
where you took those other two, and bring my father and Jacob Stuck back
again.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie, and instantly he seized the
prime-minister, and, in spite of the poor man’s kicks and struggles,
snatched him up and flew away with him swifter than the wind. On and on
he flew until he had come to the farthest part of the desert, and
there sat the king and Jacob Stuck still thinking about things. Down he
dropped the prime-minister, up he picked the king and Jacob Stuck,
and away he flew swifter than the wind. On and on he flew until he had
brought the two back to the palace again; and there sat the princess
waiting for them, with the piece of blue crystal in her hand.

“You have saved us!” cried the king.

“You have saved us!” cried Jacob Stuck. “Yes, you have saved us, and you
have my piece of good luck into the bargain. Give it to me again.”

“I will do nothing of the sort,” said the princess. “If the men folk
think no more of a piece of good luck than to hand it round like a bit
of broken glass, it is better for the women folk to keep it for them.”

And there, to my mind, she brewed good common-sense, that needed no
skimming to make it fit for Jacob Stuck, or for any other man, for the
matter of that.

And now for the end of this story. Jacob Stuck lived with his princess
in his fine palace as grand as a king, and when the old king died he
became the king after him.

One day there came two men travelling along, and they were footsore and
weary. They stopped at Jacob Stuck’s palace and asked for something to
eat. Jacob Stuck did not know them at first, and then he did. One was
Joseph and the other was John.

This is what had happened to them:

Joseph had sat and sat where John and Jacob Stuck had left him on his
box of silver money, until a band of thieves had come along and robbed
him of it all. John had carried away his pockets and his hat full of
gold, and had lived like a prince as long as it had lasted. Then he had
gone back for more, but in the meantime some rogue had come along and
had stolen it all. Yes; that was what had happened, and now they were as
poor as ever.

Jacob Stuck welcomed them and brought them in and made much of them.

Well, the truth is truth, and this is it: It is better to have a little
bit of good luck to help one in what one undertakes than to have a chest
of silver or a chest of gold.


“And now for your story, holy knight,” said Fortunatus to St. George
“for twas your turn, only for this fair lady who came in before you.”

“Aye, aye,” said the saint; “I suppose it was, in sooth, my turn.
Ne’th’less, it gives me joy to follow so close so fair and lovely a
lady.” And as he spoke he winked one eye at Cinderella, beckoned towards
her with his cup of ale, and took a deep draught to her health. “I shall
tell you,” said he, as soon as he had caught his breath again, “a
story about an angel and a poor man who travelled with him, and all the
wonderful things the poor man saw the angel do.”

“That,” said the Blacksmith who made Death sit in his pear-tree until
the wind whistled through his ribs--“that, methinks, is a better thing
to tell for a sermon than a story.”

“Whether or no that shall be so,” said St. George, “you shall presently
hear for yourselves.”

He took another deep draught of ale, and then cleared his throat.

“Stop a bit, my friend,” said Ali Baba. “What is your story about?”

“It is,” said St. George, “about--”




The Fruit of Happiness

Once upon a time there was a servant who served a wise man, and cooked
for him his cabbage and his onions and his pot-herbs and his broth, day
after day, time in and time out, for seven years.

In those years the servant was well enough contented, but no one likes
to abide in the same place forever, and so one day he took it into his
head that he would like to go out into the world to see what kind of a
fortune a man might make there for himself. “Very well,” says the wise
man, the servant’s master; “you have served me faithfully these seven
years gone, and now that you ask leave to go you shall go. But it is
little or nothing in the way of money that I can give you, and so you
will have to be content with what I can afford. See, here is a little
pebble, and its like is not to be found in the seven kingdoms, for
whoever holds it in his mouth can hear while he does so all that the
birds and the beasts say to one another. Take it--it is yours, and, if
you use it wisely, it may bring you a fortune.”

The servant would rather have had the money in hand than the magic
pebble, but, as nothing better was to be had, he took the little stone,
and, bidding his master good-bye, trudged out into the world, to seek
his fortune. Well, he jogged on and on, paying his way with the few
pennies he had saved in his seven years of service, but for all of his
travelling nothing of good happened to him until, one morning, he came
to a lonely place where there stood a gallows, and there he sat him down
to rest, and it is just in such an unlikely place as this that a man’s
best chance of fortune comes to him sometimes.

As the servant sat there, there came two ravens flying, and lit upon the
cross-beam overhead. There they began talking to one another, and the
servant popped the pebble into his mouth to hear what they might say.

“Yonder is a traveller in the world,” said the first raven.

“Yes,” said the second, “and if he only knew how to set about it, his
fortune is as good as made.”

“How is that so?” said the first raven.

“Why, thus,” said the second. “If he only knew enough to follow yonder
road over the hill, he would come by-and-by to a stone cross where two
roads meet, and there he would find a man sitting. If he would ask it of
him, that man would lead him to the garden where the fruit of happiness
grows.”

“The fruit of happiness!” said the first raven, “and of what use would
the fruit of happiness be to him?”

“What use? I tell you, friend, there is no fruit in the world like that,
for one has only to hold it in one’s hand and wish, and whatever one
asks for one shall have.”

You may guess that when the servant understood the talk of the ravens he
was not slow in making use of what he heard. Up he scrambled, and away
he went as fast as his legs could carry him. On and on he travelled,
until he came to the cross-roads and the stone cross of which the raven
spoke, and there, sure enough, sat the traveller. He was clad in a
weather-stained coat, and he wore dusty boots, and the servant bade him
good-morning.

How should the servant know that it was an angel whom he beheld, and not
a common wayfarer?

“Whither away, comrade,” asked the traveller.

“Out in the world,” said the servant, “to seek my fortune. And what I
want to know is this--will you guide me to where I can find the fruit of
happiness?”

“You ask a great thing of me,” said the other; “nevertheless, since you
do ask it, it is not for me to refuse, though I may tell you that many
a man has sought for that fruit, and few indeed have found it. But if
I guide you to the garden where the fruit grows, there is one condition
you must fulfil: many strange things will happen upon our journey
between here and there, but concerning all you see you must ask not a
question and say not a word. Do you agree to that?”

“Yes,” said the servant, “I do.”

“Very well,” said his new comrade; “then let us be jogging, for I have
business in the town to-night, and the time is none too long to get
there.”

So all the rest of that day they journeyed onward together, until,
towards evening, they came to a town with high towers and steep roofs
and tall spires. The servant’s companion entered the gate as though
he knew the place right well, and led the way up one street and down
another, until, by-and-by, they came to a noble house that stood a
little apart by itself, with gardens of flowers and fruit-trees all
around it. There the travelling companion stopped, and, drawing out a
little pipe from under his jacket, began playing so sweetly upon it that
he made one’s heart stand still to listen to the music.

Well, he played and played until, by-and-by, the door opened, and out
came a serving-man. “Ho, piper!” said he, “would you like to earn good
wages for your playing?”

“Yes,” said the travelling companion, “I would, for that is why I came
hither.”

“Then follow me,” said the servant, and thereupon the travelling
companion tucked away his pipe and entered, with the other at his heels.

The house-servant led the way from one room to another, each grander
than the one they left behind, until at last he came to a great hall
where dozens of servants were serving a fine feast. But only one man
sat at table--a young man with a face so sorrowful that it made a body’s
heart ache to look upon him. “Can you play good music, piper?” said he.

“Yes,” said the piper, “that I can, for I know a tune that can cure
sorrow. But before I blow my pipe I and my friend here must have
something to eat and drink, for one cannot play well with an empty
stomach.”

“So be it,” said the young man; “sit down with me and eat and drink.”

So the two did without second bidding, and such food and drink the
serving-man had never tasted in his life before. And while they were
feasting together the young man told them his story, and why it was
he was so sad. A year before he had married a young lady, the most
beautiful in all that kingdom, and had friends and comrades and all
things that a man could desire in the world. But suddenly everything
went wrong; his wife and he fell out and quarrelled until there was
no living together, and she had to go back to her old home. Then his
companions deserted him, and now he lived all alone.

“Yours is a hard case,” said the travelling companion, “but it is not
past curing.” Thereupon he drew out his pipes and began to play, and
it was such a tune as no man ever listened to before. He played and he
played, and, after a while, one after another of those who listened to
him began to get drowsy. First they winked, then they shut their eyes,
and then they nodded until all were as dumb as logs, and as sound asleep
as though they would never waken again. Only the servant and the piper
stayed awake, for the music did not make them drowsy as it did the rest.
Then, when all but they two were tight and fast asleep, the travelling
companion arose, tucked away his pipe, and, stepping up to the young
man, took from off his finger a splendid ruby ring, as red as blood
and as bright as fire, and popped the same into his pocket. And all the
while the serving-man stood gaping like a fish to see what his comrade
was about. “Come,” said the travelling companion, “it is time we were
going,” and off they went, shutting the door behind them.

As for the serving-man, though he remembered his promise and said
nothing concerning what he had beheld, his wits buzzed in his head like
a hive of bees, for he thought that of all the ugly tricks he had seen,
none was more ugly than this--to bewitch the poor sorrowful young man
into a sleep, and then to rob him of his ruby ring after he had fed them
so well and had treated them so kindly.

But the next day they jogged on together again until by-and-by they came
to a great forest. There they wandered up and down till night came upon
them and found them still stumbling onward through the darkness, while
the poor serving-man’s flesh quaked to hear the wild beasts and the
wolves growling and howling around them.

But all the while the angel--his travelling companion--said never a
word; he seemed to doubt nothing nor fear nothing, but trudged straight
ahead until, by-and-by, they saw a light twinkling far away, and, when
they came to it, they found a gloomy stone house, as ugly as eyes ever
looked upon. Up stepped the servant’s comrade and knocked upon the
door--rap! tap! tap! By-and-by it was opened a crack, and there stood an
ugly old woman, blear-eyed and crooked and gnarled as a winter twig.
But the heart within her was good for all that. “Alas, poor folk!”
 she cried, “why do you come here? This is a den where lives a band of
wicked thieves. Every day they go out to rob and murder poor travellers
like yourselves. By-and-by they will come back, and when they find you
here they will certainly kill you.”

“No matter for that,” said the travelling companion; “we can go no
farther to-night, so you must let us in and hide us as best you may.”

And in he went, as he said, with the servant at his heels trembling like
a leaf at what he had heard. The old woman gave them some bread and
meat to eat, and then hid them away in the great empty meal-chest in the
corner, and there they lay as still as mice.

By-and-by in came the gang of thieves with a great noise and uproar,
and down they sat to their supper. The poor servant lay in the chest
listening to all they said of the dreadful things they had done that
day--how they had cruelly robbed and murdered poor people. Every word
that they said he heard, and he trembled until his teeth chattered in
his head. But all the same the robbers knew nothing of the two being
there, and there they lay until near the dawning of the day. Then the
travelling companion bade the servant be stirring, and up they got, and
out of the chest they came, and found all the robbers sound asleep and
snoring so that the dust flew.

“Stop a bit,” said the angel--the travelling companion--“we must pay
them for our lodging.”

As he spoke he drew from his pocket the ruby ring which he had stolen
from the sorrowful young man’s finger, and dropped it into the cup from
which the robber captain drank. Then he led the way out of the house,
and, if the serving-man had wondered the day before at that which the
comrade did, he wondered ten times more to see him give so beautiful a
ring to such wicked and bloody thieves.

The third evening of their journey the two travellers came to a little
hut, neat enough, but as poor as poverty, and there the comrade knocked
upon the door and asked for lodging. In the house lived a poor man and
his wife; and, though the two were as honest as the palm of your hand,
and as good and kind as rain in spring-time, they could hardly scrape
enough of a living to keep body and soul together. Nevertheless, they
made the travellers welcome, and set before them the very best that was
to be had in the house; and, after both had eaten and drunk, they showed
them to bed in a corner as clean as snow, and there they slept the night
through.

But the next morning, before the dawning of the day, the travelling
companion was stirring again. “Come,” said he; “rouse yourself, for I
have a bit of work to do before I leave this place.”

And strange work it was! When they had come outside of the house, he
gathered together a great heap of straw and sticks of wood, and stuffed
all under the corner of the house. Then he struck a light and set fire
to it, and, as the two walked away through the gray dawn, all was a red
blaze behind them.

Still, the servant remembered his promise to his travelling comrade,
and said never a word or asked never a question, though all that day he
walked on the other side of the road, and would have nothing to say or
to do with the other. But never a whit did his comrade seem to think
of or to care for that. On they jogged, and, by the time evening was at
hand, they had come to a neat cottage with apple and pear trees around
it, all as pleasant as the eye could desire to see. In this cottage
lived a widow and her only son, and they also made the travellers
welcome, and set before them a good supper and showed them to a clean
bed.

This time the travelling comrade did neither good nor ill to those of
the house, but in the morning he told the widow whither they were going,
and asked if she and her son knew the way to the garden where grew the
fruit of happiness.

“Yes,” said she, “that we do, for the garden is not a day’s journey from
here, and my son himself shall go with you to show you the way.”

“That is good,” said the servant’s comrade, “and if he will do so I will
pay him well for his trouble.”

So the young man put on his hat, and took up his stick, and off went the
three, up hill and down dale, until by-and-by they came over the top of
the last hill, and there below them lay the garden.

And what a sight it was, the leaves shining and glistening like so many
jewels in the sunlight! I only wish that I could tell you how beautiful
that garden was. And in the middle of it grew a golden tree, and on it
golden fruit. The servant, who had travelled so long and so far, could
see it plainly from where he stood, and he did not need to be told that
it was the fruit of happiness. But, after all, all he could do was to
stand and look, for in front of them was a great raging torrent, without
a bridge for a body to cross over.

“Yonder is what you seek,” said the young man, pointing with his finger,
“and there you can see for yourself the fruit of happiness.”

The travelling companion said never a word, good or bad, but, suddenly
catching the widow’s son by the collar, he lifted him and flung him into
the black, rushing water. Splash! went the young man, and then away he
went whirling over rocks and water-falls. “There!” cried the comrade,
“that is your reward for your service!”

When the servant saw this cruel, wicked deed, he found his tongue at
last, and all that he had bottled up for the seven days came frothing
out of him like hot beer. Such abuse as he showered upon his travelling
companion no man ever listened to before. But to all the servant said
the other answered never a word until he had stopped for sheer want of
breath. Then--

“Poor fool,” said the travelling companion, “if you had only held your
tongue a minute longer, you, too, would have had the fruit of happiness
in your hand. Now it will be many a day before you have a sight of it
again.”

Thereupon, as he ended speaking, he struck his staff upon the ground.
Instantly the earth trembled, and the sky darkened overhead until it
grew as black as night. Then came a great flash of fire from up in the
sky, which wrapped the travelling companion about until he was hidden
from sight. Then the flaming fire flew away to heaven again, carrying
him along with it. After that the sky cleared once more, and, lo and
behold! The garden and the torrent and all were gone, and nothing was
left but a naked plain covered over with the bones of those who had
come that way before, seeking the fruit which the travelling servant had
sought.

It was a long time before the servant found his way back into the world
again, and the first house he came to, weak and hungry, was the widow’s.

But what a change he beheld! It was a poor cottage no longer, but a
splendid palace, fit for a queen to dwell in. The widow herself met him
at the door, and she was dressed in clothes fit for a queen to wear,
shining with gold and silver and precious stones.

The servant stood and stared like one bereft of wits. “How comes all
this change?” said he, “and how did you get all these grand things?”

“My son,” said the widow woman, “has just been to the garden, and
has brought home from there the fruit of happiness. Many a day did we
search, but never could we find how to enter into the garden, until, the
other day, an angel came and showed the way to my son, and he was able
not only to gather of the fruit for himself, but to bring an apple for
me also.”

Then the poor travelling servant began to thump his head. He saw well
enough through the millstone now, and that he, too, might have had one
of the fruit if he had but held his tongue a little longer.

Yes, he saw what a fool he had made of himself, when he learned that it
was an angel with whom he had been travelling the five days gone.

But, then, we are all of us like the servant for the matter of that; I,
too, have travelled with an angel many a day, I dare say, and never knew
it.

That night the servant lodged with the widow and her son, and the next
day he started back home again upon the way he had travelled before.
By evening he had reached the place where the house of the poor couple
stood--the house that he had seen the angel set fire to. There he beheld
masons and carpenters hard at work hacking and hewing, and building a
fine new house. And there he saw the poor man himself standing by giving
them orders. “How is this,” said the travelling servant; “I thought that
your house was burned down?”

“So it was, and that is how I came to be rich now,” said the one-time
poor man. “I and my wife had lived in our old house for many a long
day, and never knew that a great treasure of silver and gold was hidden
beneath it, until a few days ago there came an angel and burned it down
over our heads, and in the morning we found the treasure. So now we are
rich for as long as we may live.”

The next morning the poor servant jogged along on his homeward way more
sad and downcast than ever, and by evening he had come to the robbers’
den in the thick woods, and there the old woman came running to the door
to meet him. “Come in!” cried she; “come in and welcome! The robbers are
all dead and gone now, and I use the treasure that they left behind to
entertain poor travellers like yourself. The other day there came an
angel hither, and with him he brought the ring of discord that breeds
spite and rage and quarrelling. He gave it to the captain of the band,
and after he had gone the robbers fought for it with one another until
they were all killed. So now the world is rid of them, and travellers
can come and go as they please.”

Back jogged the travelling servant, and the next day came to the town
and to the house of the sorrowful young man. There, lo and behold!
Instead of being dark and silent, as it was before, all was ablaze
with light and noisy with the sound of rejoicing and merriment. There
happened to be one of the household standing at the door, and he knew
the servant as the companion of that one who had stolen the ruby ring.
Up he came and laid hold of the servant by the collar, calling to his
companions that he had caught one of the thieves. Into the house they
hauled the poor servant, and into the same room where he had been
before, and there sat the young man at a grand feast, with his wife
and all his friends around him. But when the young man saw the poor
serving-man he came to him and took him by the hand, and set him beside
himself at the table. “Nobody except your comrade could be so welcome
as you,” said he, “and this is why. An enemy of mine one time gave me a
ruby ring, and though I knew nothing of it, it was the ring of discord
that bred strife wherever it came. So, as soon as it was brought
into the house, my wife and all my friends fell out with me, and we
quarrelled so that they all left me. But, though I knew it not at that
time, your comrade was an angel, and took the ring away with him, and
now I am as happy as I was sorrowful before.”

By the next night the servant had come back to his home again. Rap! tap!
tap! He knocked at the door, and the wise man who had been his master
opened to him. “What do you want?” said he.

“I want to take service with you again,” said the travelling servant.

“Very well,” said the wise man; “come in and shut the door.”

And for all I know the travelling servant is there to this day. For he
is not the only one in the world who has come in sight of the fruit of
happiness, and then jogged all the way back home again to cook cabbage
and onions and pot-herbs, and to make broth for wiser men than himself
to sup.

That is the end of this story.


“I like your story, holy sir,” said the Blacksmith who made Death sit in
a pear-tree. “Ne’th’less, it hath indeed somewhat the smack of a sermon,
after all. Methinks I am like my friend yonder,” and he pointed with
his thumb towards Fortunatus; “I like to hear a story about treasures of
silver and gold, and about kings and princes--a story that turneth out
well in the end, with everybody happy, and the man himself married in
luck, rather than one that turneth out awry, even if it hath an angel in
it.”

“Well, well,” said St. George, testily, “one cannot please everybody.
But as for being a sermon, why, certes, my story was not that--and even
if it were, it would not have hurt thee, sirrah.”

“No offence,” said the Blacksmith; “I meant not to speak ill of your
story. Come, come, sir, will you not take a pot of ale with me?”

“Why,” said St. George, somewhat mollified, “for the matter of that, I
would as lief as not.”

“I liked the story well enough,” piped up the little Tailor who had
killed seven flies at a blow. “Twas a good enough story of its sort, but
why does nobody tell a tale of good big giants, and of wild boars, and
of unicorns, such as I killed in my adventures you wot of?”

Old Ali Baba had been sitting with his hands folded and his eyes closed.
Now he opened them and looked at the Little Tailor. “I know a story,”
 said he, “about a Genie who was as big as a giant, and six times as
powerful. And besides that,” he added, “the story is all about treasures
of gold, and palaces, and kings, and emperors, and what not, and about
a cave such as that in which I myself found the treasure of the forty
thieves.”

The Blacksmith who made Death sit in the pear-tree clattered the bottom
of his canican against the table. “Aye, aye,” said he, “that is the sort
of story for me. Come, friend, let us have it.”

“Stop a bit,” said Fortunatus; “what is this story mostly about?”

“It is,” said Ali Baba, “about two men betwixt whom there was--”




Not a Pin to Choose.

Once upon a time, in a country in the far East, a merchant was
travelling towards the city with three horses loaded with rich goods,
and a purse containing a hundred pieces of gold money. The day was very
hot, and the road dusty and dry, so that, by-and-by, when he reached a
spot where a cool, clear spring of water came bubbling out from under
a rock beneath the shade of a wide-spreading wayside tree, he was glad
enough to stop and refresh himself with a draught of the clear coolness
and rest awhile. But while he stooped to drink at the fountain the purse
of gold fell from his girdle into the tall grass, and he, not seeing it,
let it lie there, and went his way.

Now it chanced that two fagot-makers--the elder by name Ali, the younger
Abdallah--who had been in the woods all day chopping fagots, came also
travelling the same way, and stopped at the same fountain to drink.
There the younger of the two spied the purse lying in the grass, and
picked it up. But when he opened it and found it full of gold money, he
was like one bereft of wits; he flung his arms, he danced, he shouted,
he laughed, he acted like a madman; for never had he seen so much wealth
in all of his life before--a hundred pieces of gold money!

Now the older of the two was by nature a merry wag, and though he had
never had the chance to taste of pleasure, he thought that nothing in
the world could be better worth spending money for than wine and music
and dancing. So, when the evening had come, he proposed that they
two should go and squander it all at the Inn. But the younger
fellow--Abdallah--was by nature just as thrifty as the other was
spendthrift, and would not consent to waste what he had found.
Nevertheless, he was generous and open-hearted, and grudged his friend
nothing; so, though he did not care for a wild life himself, he gave Ali
a piece of gold to spend as he chose.

By morning every copper of what had been given to the elder fagot-maker
was gone, and he had never had such a good time in his life before. All
that day and for a week the head of Ali was so full of the memory of the
merry night that he had enjoyed that he could think of nothing else.
At last, one evening, he asked Abdallah for another piece of gold, and
Abdallah gave it to him, and by the next morning it had vanished in the
same way that the other had flown. By-and-by Ali borrowed a third piece
of money, and then a fourth and then a fifth, so that by the time that
six months had passed and gone he had spent thirty of the hundred pieces
that had been found, and in all that time Abdallah had used not so much
as a pistareen.

But when Ali came for the thirty-and-first loan, Abdallah refused to
let him have any more money. It was in vain that the elder begged and
implored--the younger abided by what he had said.

Then Ali began to put on a threatening front. “You will not let me have
the money?” he said.

“No, I will not.”

“You will not?”

“No!”

“Then you shall!” cried Ali; and, so saying, caught the younger
fagot-maker by the throat, and began shaking him and shouting, “Help!
Help! I am robbed! I am robbed!” He made such an uproar that half a
hundred men, women, and children were gathered around them in less than
a minute. “Here is ingratitude for you!” cried Ali. “Here is wickedness
and thievery! Look at this wretch, all good men, and then turn away
your eyes! For twelve years have I lived with this young man as a father
might live with a son, and now how does he repay me? He has stolen all
that I have in the world--a purse of seventy sequins of gold.”

All this while poor Abdallah had been so amazed that he could do nothing
but stand and stare like one stricken dumb; whereupon all the people,
thinking him guilty, dragged him off to the judge, reviling him and
heaping words of abuse upon him.

Now the judge of that town was known far and near as the “Wise Judge”;
but never had he had such a knotty question as this brought up before
him, for by this time Abdallah had found his speech, and swore with a
great outcry that the money belonged to him.

But at last a gleam of light came to the Wise Judge in his perplexity.
“Can any one tell me,” said he, “which of these fellows has had money of
late, and which has had none?”

His question was one easily enough answered; a score of people were
there to testify that the elder of the two had been living well and
spending money freely for six months and more, and a score were also
there to swear that Abdallah had lived all the while in penury. “Then
that decides the matter,” said the Wise Judge. “The money belongs to the
elder fagot-maker.”

“But listen, oh my lord judge!” cried Abdallah. “All that this man has
spent I have given to him--I, who found the money. Yes, my lord, I have
given it to him, and myself have spent not so much as single mite.”

All who were present shouted with laughter at Abdallah’s speech, for
who would believe that any one would be so generous as to spend all upon
another and none upon himself?

So poor Abdallah was beaten with rods until he confessed where he had
hidden his money; then the Wise Judge handed fifty sequins to Ali and
kept twenty himself for his decision, and all went their way praising
his justice and judgment.

That is to say, all but poor Abdallah; he went to his home weeping and
wailing, and with every one pointing the finger of scorn at him. He was
just as poor as ever, and his back was sore with the beating that he
had suffered. All that night he continued to weep and wail, and when the
morning had come he was weeping and wailing still.

Now it chanced that a wise man passed that way, and hearing his
lamentation, stopped to inquire the cause of his trouble. Abdallah told
the other of his sorrow, and the wise man listened, smiling, till he was
done, and then he laughed outright. “My son,” said he, “if every one in
your case should shed tears as abundantly as you have done, the world
would have been drowned in salt water by this time. As for your friend,
think not ill of him; no man loveth another who is always giving.”

“Nay,” said the young fagot-maker, “I believe not a word of what
you say. Had I been in his place I would have been grateful for the
benefits, and not have hated the giver.”

But the wise man only laughed louder than ever. “Maybe you will have the
chance to prove what you say some day,” said he, and went his way, still
shaking with his merriment.

“All this,” said Ali Baba, “is only the beginning of my story; and now
if the damsel will fill up my pot of ale, I will begin in earnest and
tell about the cave of the Genie.”

He watched Little Brown Betty until she had filled his mug, and the
froth ran over the top. Then he took a deep draught and began again.

Though Abdallah had affirmed that he did not believe what the wise man
had said, nevertheless the words of the other were a comfort, for it
makes one feel easier in trouble to be told that others have been in a
like case with one’s self.

So, by-and-by, Abdallah plucked up some spirit, and, saddling his
ass and shouldering his axe, started off to the woods for a bundle of
fagots.

Misfortunes, they say, never come single, and so it seemed to be with
the fagot-maker that day; for that happened that had never happened to
him before--he lost his way in the woods. On he went, deeper and deeper
into the thickets, driving his ass before him, bewailing himself and
rapping his head with his knuckles. But all his sorrowing helped him
nothing, and by the time that night fell he found himself deep in the
midst of a great forest full of wild beasts, the very thought of which
curdled his blood. He had had nothing to eat all day long, and now
the only resting-place left him was the branches of some tree. So,
unsaddling his ass and leaving it to shift for itself, he climbed to and
roosted himself in the crotch of a great limb.

In spite of his hunger he presently fell asleep, for trouble breeds
weariness as it breeds grief.

About the dawning of the day he was awakened by the sound of voices and
the glaring of lights. He craned his neck and looked down, and there he
saw a sight that filled him with amazement: three old men riding each
upon a milk-white horse and each bearing a lighted torch in his hand, to
light the way through the dark forest.

When they had come just below where Abdallah sat, they dismounted and
fastened their several horses to as many trees. Then he who rode first
of the three, and who wore a red cap and who seemed to be the chief of
them, walked solemnly up to a great rock that stood in the hillside,
and, breaking a switch from a shrub that grew in a cleft, struck the
face of the stone, crying in a loud voice, “I command thee to open, in
the name of the red Aldebaran!”

Instantly, creaking and groaning, the face of the rock opened like
a door, gaping blackly. Then, one after another, the three old men
entered, and nothing was left but the dull light of their torches,
shining on the walls of the passage-way.

What happened inside the cavern the fagot-maker could neither see nor
hear, but minute after minute passed while he sat as in a maze at all
that had happened. Then presently he heard a deep thundering voice and
a voice as of one of the old men in answer. Then there came a sound
swelling louder and louder, as though a great crowd of people were
gathering together, and with the voices came the noise of the neighing
of horses and the trampling of hoofs. Then at last there came pouring
from out the rock a great crowd of horses laden with bales and bundles
of rich stuffs and chests and caskets of gold and silver and jewels,
and each horse was led by a slave clad in a dress of cloth-of-gold,
sparkling and glistening with precious gems. When all these had come
out from the cavern, other horses followed, upon each of which sat
a beautiful damsel, more lovely than the fancy of man could picture.
Beside the damsels marched a guard, each man clad in silver armor, and
each bearing a drawn sword that flashed in the brightening day more
keenly than the lightning. So they all came pouring forth from the
cavern until it seemed as though the whole woods below were filled with
the wealth and the beauty of King Solomon’s day--and then, last of all,
came the three old men.

“In the name of the red Aldebaran,” said he who had bidden the rock to
open, “I command thee to become closed.” Again, creaking and groaning,
the rock shut as it had opened--like a door--and the three old men,
mounting their horses, led the way from the woods, the others following.
The noise and confusion of the many voices shouting and calling, the
trample and stamp of horses, grew fainter and fainter, until at last
all was once more hushed and still, and only the fagot-maker was left
behind, still staring like one dumb and bereft of wits.

But so soon as he was quite sure that all were really gone, he clambered
down as quickly as might be. He waited for a while to make doubly sure
that no one was left behind, and then he walked straight up to the rock,
just as he had seen the old man do. He plucked a switch from the bush,
just as he had seen the old man pluck one, and struck the stone, just
as the old man had struck it. “I command thee to open,” said he, “in the
name of the red Aldebaran!”

Instantly, as it had done in answer to the old man’s command, there came
a creaking and a groaning, and the rock slowly opened like a door, and
there was the passageway yawning before him. For a moment or two the
fagot-maker hesitated to enter; but all was as still as death, and
finally he plucked up courage and went within.

By this time the day was brightening and the sun rising, and by the gray
light the fagot-maker could see about him pretty clearly. Not a sign was
to be seen of horses or of treasure or of people--nothing but a square
block of marble, and upon it a black casket, and upon that again a gold
ring, in which was set a blood-red stone. Beyond these things there was
nothing; the walls were bare, the roof was bare, the floor was bare--all
was bare and naked stone.

“Well,” said the wood-chopper, “as the old men have taken everything
else, I might as well take these things. The ring is certainly worth
something, and maybe I shall be able to sell the casket for a trifle
into the bargain.” So he slipped the ring upon his finger, and, taking
up the casket, left the place. “I command thee to be closed,” said
he, “in the name of the red Aldebaran!” And thereupon the door closed,
creaking and groaning.

After a little while he found his ass, saddled it and bridled it, and
loaded it with the bundle of fagots that he had chopped the day before,
and then set off again to try to find his way out of the thick woods.
But still his luck was against him, and the farther he wandered the
deeper he found himself in the thickets. In the meantime he was like to
die of hunger, for he had not a bite to eat for more than a whole day.

“Perhaps,” said he to himself, “there may be something in the casket to
stay my stomach;” and, so saying, he sat him down, unlocked the casket,
and raised the lid.

Such a yell as the poor wretch uttered ears never heard before. Over
he rolled upon his back and there lay staring with wide eyes, and away
scampered the jackass, kicking up his heels and braying so that the
leaves of the trees trembled and shook. For no sooner had he lifted the
lid than out leaped a great hideous Genie, as black as a coal, with one
fiery-red eye in the middle of his forehead that glared and rolled most
horribly, and with his hands and feet set with claws, sharp and hooked
like the talons of a hawk. Poor Abdallah the fagot-maker lay upon his
back staring at the monster with a face as white as wax.

“What are thy commands?” said the Genie in a terrible voice, that
rumbled like the sound of thunder.

“I--I do not know,” said Abdallah, trembling and shaking as with an
ague. “I--I have forgotten.”

“Ask what thou wilt,” said the Genie, “for I must ever obey whomsoever
hast the ring that thou wearest upon thy finger. Hath my lord nothing to
command wherein I may serve him?”

Abdallah shook his head. “No,” said he, “there is
nothing--unless--unless you will bring me something to eat.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie. “What will my lord be pleased to
have?”

“Just a little bread and cheese,” said Abdallah.

The Genie waved his hand, and in an instant a fine damask napkin lay
spread upon the ground, and upon it a loaf of bread as white as snow and
a piece of cheese such as the king would have been glad to taste. But
Abdallah could do nothing but sit staring at the Genie, for the sight of
the monster quite took away his appetite.

“What more can I do to serve thee?” asked the Genie.

“I think,” said Abdallah, “that I could eat more comfortably if you were
away.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie. “Whither shall I go? Shall I enter
the casket again?”

“I do not know,” said the fagot-maker; “how did you come to be there?”

“I am a great Genie,” answered the monster, “and was conjured thither
by the great King Solomon, whose seal it is that thou wearest upon thy
finger. For a certain fault that I committed I was confined in the box
and hidden in the cavern where thou didst find me to-day. There I lay
for thousands of years until one day three old magicians discovered
the secret of where I lay hidden. It was they who only this morning
compelled me to give them that vast treasure which thou sawest them take
away from the cavern not long since.”

“But why did they not take you and the box and the ring away also?”
 asked Abdallah.

“Because,” answered the Genie, “they are three brothers, and neither two
care to trust the other one with such power as the ring has to give, so
they made a solemn compact among themselves that I should remain in the
cavern, and that no one of the three should visit it without the other
two in his company. Now, my lord, if it is thy will that I shall enter
the casket again I must even obey thy command in that as in all things;
but, if it please thee, I would fain rejoin my own kind again--they from
whom I have been parted for so long. Shouldst thou permit me to do so
I will still be thy slave, for thou hast only to press the red stone in
the ring and repeat these words: By the red Aldebaran, I command thee
to come,’ and I will be with thee instantly. But if I have my freedom
I shall serve thee from gratitude and love, and not from compulsion and
with fear.”

“So be it!” said Abdallah. “I have no choice in the matter, and thou
mayest go whither it pleases thee.”

No sooner had the words left his lips than the Genie gave a great cry
of rejoicing, so piercing that it made Abdallah’s flesh creep, and then,
fetching the black casket a kick that sent it flying over the tree tops,
vanished instantly.

“Well,” quote Abdallah, when he had caught his breath from his
amazement, “these are the most wonderful things that have happened to
me in all of my life.” And thereupon he fell to at the bread and cheese,
and ate as only a hungry man can eat. When he had finished the last
crumb he wiped his mouth with the napkin, and, stretching his arms, felt
within him that he was like a new man.

Nevertheless, he was still lost in the woods, and now not even with his
ass for comradeship.

He had wandered for quite a little while before he bethought himself of
the Genie. “What a fool am I,” said he, “not to have asked him to help
me while he was here.” He pressed his finger upon the ring, and cried in
a loud voice, “By the red Aldebaran, I command thee to come!”

Instantly the Genie stood before him--big, black, ugly, and grim. “What
are my lord’s commands?” said he.

“I command thee,” said Abdallah the fagot-maker, who was not half
so frightened at the sight of the monster this time as he had been
before--“I command thee to help me out of this woods.”

Hardly were the words out of his mouth when the Genie snatched Abdallah
up, and, flying swifter than the lightning, set him down in the middle
of the highway on the outskirts of the forest before he had fairly
caught his breath.

When he did gather his wits and looked about him, he knew very well
where he was, and that he was upon the road that led to the city. At the
sight his heart grew light within him, and off he stepped briskly for
home again.

But the sun shone hot and the way was warm and dusty, and before
Abdallah had gone very far the sweat was running down his face in
streams. After a while he met a rich husband-man riding easily along on
an ambling nag, and when Abdallah saw him he rapped his head with his
knuckles. “Why did I not think to ask the Genie for a horse?” said he.
“I might just as well have ridden as to have walked, and that upon
a horse a hundred times more beautiful than the one that that fellow
rides.”

He stepped into the thicket beside the way, where he might be out of
sight, and there pressed the stone in his ring, and at his bidding the
Genie stood before him.

“What are my lord’s commands?” said he.

“I would like to have a noble horse to ride upon,” said Abdallah--“a
horse such as a king might use.”

“To hear is to obey,” said the Genie; and, stretching out his hand,
there stood before Abdallah a magnificent Arab horse, with a saddle and
bridle studded with precious stones, and with housings of gold. “Can I
do aught to serve my lord further?” said the Genie.

“Not just now,” said Abdallah; “if I have further use for you I will
call you.”

The Genie bowed his head and was gone like a flash, and Abdallah mounted
his horse and rode off upon his way. But he had not gone far before
he drew rein suddenly. “How foolish must I look,” said he, “to be thus
riding along the high-road upon this noble steed, and I myself clad in
fagot-maker’s rags.” Thereupon he turned his horse into the thicket, and
again summoned the Genie. “I should like,” said he, “to have a suit of
clothes fit for a king to wear.”

“My lord shall have that which he desires,” said the Genie. He stretched
out his hand, and in an instant there lay across his arm raiment such
as the eyes of man never saw before--stiff with pearls, and blazing with
diamonds and rubies and emeralds and sapphires. The Genie himself aided
Abdallah to dress, and when he looked down he felt, for the time, quite
satisfied.

He rode a little farther. Then suddenly he bethought himself, “What a
silly spectacle shall I cut in the town with no money in my purse and
with such fine clothes upon my back.” Once more the Genie was summoned.
“I should like,” said the fagot-maker, “to have a box full of money.”

The Genie stretched out his hand, and in it was a casket of
mother-of-pearl inlaid with gold and full of money. “Has my lord any
further commands for his servant?” asked he.

“No,” answered Abdallah. “Stop--I have, too,” he added. “Yes; I would
like to have a young man to carry my money for me.”

“He is here,” said the Genie. And there stood a beautiful youth clad in
clothes of silver tissue, and holding a milk-white horse by the bridle.

“Stay, Genie,” said Abdallah. “Whilst thou art here thou mayest as
well give me enough at once to last me a long time to come. Let me have
eleven more caskets of money like this one, and eleven more slaves to
carry the same.”

“They are here,” said the Genie; and as he spoke there stood eleven more
youths before Abdallah, as like the first as so many pictures of the
same person, and each youth bore in his hands a box like the one that
the monster had given Abdallah. “Will my lord have anything further?”
 asked the Genie.

“Let me think,” said Abdallah. “Yes; I know the town well, and that
should one so rich as I ride into it without guards he would be certain
to be robbed before he had travelled a hundred paces. Let me have an
escort of a hundred armed men.”

“It shall be done,” said the Genie, and, waving his hand, the road where
they stood was instantly filled with armed men, with swords and helmets
gleaming and flashing in the sun, and all seated upon magnificently
caparisoned horses. “Can I serve my lord further?” asked the Genie.

“No,” said Abdallah the fagot-maker, in admiration, “I have nothing more
to wish for in this world. Thou mayest go, Genie, and it will be long
ere I will have to call thee again,” and thereupon the Genie was gone
like a flash.

The captain of Abdallah’s troop--a bearded warrior clad in a superb suit
of armor--rode up to the fagot-maker, and, leaping from his horse and
bowing before him so that his forehead touched the dust, said, “Whither
shall we ride, my lord?”

Abdallah smote his forehead with vexation. “If I live a thousand years,”
 said he, “I will never learn wisdom.” Thereupon, dismounting again, he
pressed the ring and summoned the Genie. “I was mistaken,” said he, “as
to not wanting thee so soon. I would have thee build me in the city a
magnificent palace, such as man never looked upon before, and let it be
full from top to bottom with rich stuffs and treasures of all sorts. And
let it have gardens and fountains and terraces fitting for such a place,
and let it be meetly served with slaves, both men and women, the most
beautiful that are to be found in all the world.”

“Is there aught else that thou wouldst have?” asked the Genie.

The fagot-maker meditated a long time. “I can bethink myself of nothing
more just now,” said he.

The Genie turned to the captain of the troop and said some words to him
in a strange tongue, and then in a moment was gone. The captain gave the
order to march, and away they all rode with Abdallah in the midst. “Who
would have thought,” said he, looking around him, with the heart within
him swelling with pride as though it would burst--“who would have
thought that only this morning I was a poor fagot-maker, lost in the
woods and half starved to death? Surely there is nothing left for me to
wish for in this world!”

Abdallah was talking of something he knew nothing of.

Never before was such a sight seen in that country, as Abdallah and
his troop rode through the gates and into the streets of the city.
But dazzling and beautiful as were those who rode attendant upon him,
Abdallah the fagot-maker surpassed them all as the moon dims the lustre
of the stars. The people crowded around shouting with wonder, and
Abdallah, in the fulness of his delight, gave orders to the slaves who
bore the caskets of money to open them and to throw the gold to the
people. So, with those in the streets scrambling and fighting for the
money and shouting and cheering, and others gazing down at the spectacle
from the windows and house-tops, the fagot-maker and his troop rode
slowly along through the town.

Now it chanced that their way led along past the royal palace, and the
princess, hearing all the shouting and the hubbub, looked over the edge
of the balcony and down into the street. At the same moment Abdallah
chanced to look up, and their eyes met. Thereupon the fagot-maker’s
heart crumbled away within him, for she was the most beautiful princess
in all the world. Her eyes were as black as night, her hair like threads
of fine silk, her neck like alabaster, and her lips and her cheeks as
soft and as red as rose-leaves. When she saw that Abdallah was looking
at her she dropped the curtain of the balcony and was gone, and the
fagot-maker rode away, sighing like a furnace.

So, by-and-by, he came to his palace, which was built all of marble
as white as snow, and which was surrounded with gardens, shaded by
flowering trees, and cooled by the plashing of fountains. From the
gateway to the door of the palace a carpet of cloth-of-gold had been
spread for him to walk upon, and crowds of slaves stood waiting to
receive him. But for all these glories Abdallah cared nothing; he hardly
looked about him, but, going straight to his room, pressed his ring and
summoned the Genie.

“What is it that my lord would have?” asked the monster.

“Oh, Genie!” said poor Abdallah, “I would have the princess for my wife,
for without her I am like to die.”

“My lord’s commands,” said the Genie, “shall be executed if I have to
tear down the city to do so. But perhaps this behest is not so hard to
fulfil. First of all, my lord will have to have an ambassador to send to
the king.”

“Very well,” said Abdallah with a sigh; “let me have an ambassador or
whatever may be necessary. Only make haste, Genie, in thy doings.”

“I shall lose no time,” said the Genie; and in a moment was gone.

The king was sitting in council with all of the greatest lords of the
land gathered about him, for the Emperor of India had declared war
against him, and he and they were in debate, discussing how the country
was to be saved. Just then Abdallah’s ambassador arrived, and when he
and his train entered the council-chamber all stood up to receive him,
for the least of those attendant upon him was more magnificently attired
than the king himself, and was bedecked with such jewels as the royal
treasury could not match.

Kneeling before the king, the ambassador touched the ground with his
forehead. Then, still kneeling, he unrolled a scroll, written in letters
of gold, and from it read the message asking for the princess to wife
for the Lord Abdallah.

When he had ended, the king sat for a while stroking his beard and
meditating. But before he spoke the oldest lord of the council arose and
said: “O sire! If this Lord Abdallah who asks for the princess for his
wife can send such a magnificent company in the train of his ambassador,
may it not be that he may be able also to help you in your war against
the Emperor of India?”

“True!” said the king. Then turning to the ambassador: “Tell your
master,” said he, “that if he will furnish me with an army of one
hundred thousand men, to aid me in the war against the Emperor of India,
he shall have my daughter for his wife.”

“Sire,” said the ambassador, “I will answer now for my master, and the
answer shall be this: That he will help you with an army, not of one
hundred thousand, but of two hundred thousand men. And if to-morrow you
will be pleased to ride forth to the plain that lieth to the south of
the city, my Lord Abdallah will meet you there with his army.” Then,
once more bowing, he withdrew from the council-chamber, leaving all them
that were there amazed at what had happened.

So the next day the king and all his court rode out to the place
appointed. As they drew near they saw that the whole face of the plain
was covered with a mighty host, drawn up in troops and squadrons. As the
king rode towards this vast army, Abdallah met him, surrounded by his
generals. He dismounted and would have kneeled, but the king would not
permit him, but, raising him, kissed him upon the cheek, calling him
son. Then the king and Abdallah rode down before the ranks and the whole
army waved their swords, and the flashing of the sunlight on the blades
was like lightning, and they shouted, and the noise was like the pealing
of thunder.

Before Abdallah marched off to the wars he and the princess were
married, and for a whole fortnight nothing was heard but the sound of
rejoicing. The city was illuminated from end to end, and all of the
fountains ran with wine instead of water. And of all those who rejoiced,
none was so happy as the princess, for never had she seen one whom
she thought so grand and noble and handsome as her husband. After the
fortnight had passed and gone, the army marched away to the wars with
Abdallah at its head.

Victory after victory followed, for in every engagement the Emperor of
India’s troops were driven from the field. In two months’ time the war
was over and Abdallah marched back again--the greatest general in the
world. But it was no longer as Abdallah that he was known, but as the
Emperor of India, for the former emperor had been killed in the war, and
Abdallah had set the crown upon his own head.

The little taste that he had had of conquest had given him an appetite
for more, so that with the armies the Genie provided him he conquered
all the neighboring countries and brought them under his rule. So he
became the greatest emperor in all the world; kings and princes kneeled
before him, and he, Abdallah, the fagot-maker, looking about him, could
say: “No one in all the world is so great as I!”

Could he desire anything more?

Yes; he did! He desired to be rid of the Genie!

When he thought of how all that he was in power and might--he, the
Emperor of the World--how all his riches and all his glory had come
as gifts from a hideous black monster with only one eye, his heart was
filled with bitterness. “I cannot forget,” said he to himself, “that
as he has given me all these things, he may take them all away again.
Suppose that I should lose my ring and that some one else should find
it; who knows but that they might become as great as I, and strip me
of everything, as I have stripped others. Yes; I wish he was out of the
way!”

Once, when such thoughts as these were passing through his mind, he was
paying a visit to his father-in-law, the king. He was walking up and
down the terrace of the garden meditating on these matters, when,
leaning over a wall and looking down into the street, he saw a
fagot-maker--just such a fagot-maker as he himself had one time
been--driving an ass--just such an ass as he had one time driven. The
fagot-maker carried something under his arm, and what should it be but
the very casket in which the Genie had once been imprisoned, and
which he--the one-time fagot-maker--had seen the Genie kick over the
tree-tops.

The sight of the casket put a sudden thought into his mind. He shouted
to his attendants, and bade them haste and bring the fagot-maker to
him. Off they ran, and in a little while came dragging the poor wretch,
trembling and as white as death; for he thought nothing less than that
his end had certainly come. As soon as those who had seized him had
loosened their hold, he flung himself prostrate at the feet of the
Emperor Abdallah, and there lay like one dead.

“Where didst thou get yonder casket?” asked the emperor.

“Oh, my lord!” croaked the poor fagot-maker, “I found it out yonder in
the woods.”

“Give it to me,” said the emperor, “and my treasurer shall count thee
out a thousand pieces of gold in exchange.”

So soon as he had the casket safe in his hands he hurried away to his
privy chamber, and there pressed the red stone in his ring. “In the
name of the red Aldebaran, I command thee to appear!” said he, and in a
moment the Genie stood before him.

“What are my lord’s commands?” said he.

“I would have thee enter this casket again,” said the Emperor Abdallah.

“Enter the casket!” cried the Genie, aghast.

“Enter the casket.”

“In what have I done anything to offend my lord?” said the Genie.

“In nothing,” said the emperor; “only I would have thee enter the casket
again as thou wert when I first found thee.”

It was in vain that the Genie begged and implored for mercy, it was in
vain that he reminded Abdallah of all that he had done to benefit him;
the great emperor stood as hard as a rock--into the casket the Genie
must and should go. So at last into the casket the monster went,
bellowing most lamentably.

The Emperor Abdallah shut the lid of the casket, and locked it and
sealed it with his seal. Then, hiding it under his cloak, he bore it out
into the garden and to a deep well, and, first making sure that nobody
was by to see, dropped casket and Genie and all into the water.

Now had that wise man been by--the wise man who had laughed so when
the poor young fagot-maker wept and wailed at the ingratitude of
his friend--the wise man who had laughed still louder when the young
fagot-maker vowed that in another case he would not have been so
ungrateful to one who had benefited him--how that wise man would have
roared when he heard the casket plump into the waters of the well! For,
upon my word of honor, betwixt Ali the fagot-maker and Abdallah the
Emperor of the World there was not a pin to choose, except in degree.


Old Ali Baba’s pipe had nearly gone out, and he fell a puffing at it
until the spark grew to life again, and until great clouds of smoke
rolled out around his head and up through the rafters above.

“I liked thy story, friend,” said old Bidpai--“I liked it mightily much.
I liked more especially the way in which thy emperor got rid of his
demon, or Genie.”

Fortunatus took a long pull at his mug of ale. “I know not,” said he,
“about the demon, but there was one part that I liked much, and that
was about the treasures of silver and gold and the palace that the Genie
built and all the fine things that the poor fagot-maker enjoyed.” Then
he who had once carried the magic purse in his pocket fell a clattering
with the bottom of his quart cup upon the table. “Hey! My pretty lass,”
 cried he, “come hither and fetch me another stoup of ale.”

Little Brown Betty came at his call, stumbling and tumbling into the
room, just as she had stumbled and tumbled in the Mother Goose book,
only this time she did not crack her crown, but gathered herself up
laughing.

“You may fill my canican while you are about it,” said St. George, “for,
by my faith, tis dry work telling a story.”

“And mine, too,” piped the little Tailor who killed seven flies at a
blow.

“And whose turn is it now to tell a story?” said Doctor Faustus.

“Tis his,” said the Lad who fiddled for the Jew, and he pointed to Hans
who traded and traded until he had traded his lump of gold for an empty
churn.

Hans grinned sheepishly. “Well,” said he, “I never did have luck at
anything, and why, then, d’ye think I should have luck at telling a
story?”

“Nay, never mind that,” said Aladdin, “tell thy story, friend, as best
thou mayst.”

“Very well,” said Hans, “if ye will have it, I will tell it to you; but,
after all, it is not better than my own story, and the poor man in the
end gets no more than I did in my bargains.”

“And what is your story about, my friend?” said Cinderella.

“Tis,” said Hans, “about how--”




Much shall have more and little shall have less.

Once upon a time there was a king who did the best he could to rule
wisely and well, and to deal justly by those under him whom he had to
take care of; and as he could not trust hearsay, he used every now and
then to slip away out of his palace and go among his people to hear what
they had to say for themselves about him and the way he ruled the land.

Well, one such day as this, when he was taking a walk, he strolled out
past the walls of the town and into the green fields until he came at
last to a fine big house that stood by the banks of a river, wherein
lived a man and his wife who were very well to do in the world. There
the king stopped for a bite of bread and a drink of fresh milk.

“I would like to ask you a question,” said the king to the rich man;
“and the question is this: Why are some folk rich and some folk poor?”

“That I cannot tell you,” said the good man; “only I remember my father
used to say that much shall have more and little shall have less.”

“Very well,” said the king; “the saying has a good sound, but let us
find whether or not it is really true. See; here is a purse with three
hundred pieces of golden money in it. Take it and give it to the poorest
man you know; in a week’s time I will come again, and then you shall
tell me whether it has made you or him the richer.”

Now in the town there lived two beggars who were as poor as poverty
itself, and the poorer of the twain was one who used to sit in rags and
tatters on the church step to beg charity of the good folk who came and
went. To him went the rich man, and, without so much as a good-morning,
quoth he: “Here is something for you,” and so saying dropped the purse
of gold into the beggar’s hat. Then away he went without waiting for a
word of thanks.

As for the beggar, he just sat there for a while goggling and staring
like one moon-struck. But at last his wits came back to him, and then
away he scampered home as fast as his legs could carry him. Then he
spread his money out on the table and counted it--three hundred pieces
of gold money! He had never seen such great riches in his life before.
There he sat feasting his eyes upon the treasure as though they would
never get their fill. And now what was he to do with all of it? Should
he share his fortune with his brother? Not a bit of it. To be sure,
until now they had always shared and shared alike, but here was the
first great lump of good-luck that had ever fallen in his way, and he
was not for spoiling it by cutting it in two to give half to a poor
beggar-man such as his brother. Not he; he would hide it and keep it all
for his very own.

Now, not far from where he lived, and beside the river, stood a
willow-tree, and thither the lucky beggar took his purse of money and
stuffed it into a knot-hole of a withered branch, then went his
way, certain that nobody would think of looking for money in such a
hiding-place. Then all the rest of the day he sat thinking and thinking
of the ways he would spend what had been given him, and what he would do
to get the most good out of it. At last came evening, and his brother,
who had been begging in another part of the town, came home again.

“I nearly lost my hat to-day,” said the second beggar so soon as he had
come into the house.

“Did you?” said the first beggar. “How was that?”

“Oh! The wind blew it off into the water, but I got it again.”

“How did you get it?” said the first beggar.

“I just broke a dead branch off of the willow-tree and drew my hat
ashore,” said the second beggar.

“A dead branch!!”

“A dead branch.”

“Off of the willow tree!!”

“Off of the willow tree.”

The first beggar could hardly breathe.

“And what did you do with the dead branch after that?”

“I threw it away into the water, and it floated down the river.”

The beggar to whom the money had been given ran out of the house
howling, and down to the river-side, thumping his head with his knuckles
like one possessed. For he knew that the branch his brother had broken
off of the tree and had thrown into the water, was the very one in which
he had hidden the bag of money.

Yes; and so it was.

The next morning, as the rich man took a walk down by the river, he saw
a dead branch that had been washed up by the tide. “Halloo!” says he,
“this will do to kindle the fire with.”

So he brought it to the house, and, taking down his axe, began to split
it up for kindling. The very first blow he gave, out tumbled the bag of
money.

But the beggar--well, by-and-by his grieving got better of its first
smart, and then he started off down the river to see if he could not
find his money again. He hunted up and he hunted down, but never a whit
of it did he see, and at last he stopped at the rich man’s house and
begged for a bite to eat and lodgings for the night. There he told all
his story--how he had hidden the money that had been given him from his
brother, how his brother had broken off the branch and had thrown it
away, and how he had spent the whole live-long day searching for it. And
to all the rich man listened and said never a word. But though he said
nothing, he thought to himself, “Maybe, after all, it is not the will of
Heaven that this man shall have the money. Nevertheless, I will give him
another trial.”

So he told the poor beggar to come in and stay for the night; and,
whilst the beggar was snoring away in his bed in the garret, the rich
man had his wife make two great pies, each with a fine brown crust. In
the first pie he put the little bag of money; the second he filled full
of rusty nails and scraps of iron.

The next morning he called the beggar to him. “My friend,” said he, “I
grieve sadly for the story you told me last night. But maybe, after all,
your luck is not all gone. And now, if you will choose as you should
choose, you shall not go away from here comfortless. In the pantry
yonder are two great pies--one is for you and one for me. Go in and take
whichever one you please.”

“A pie!” thought the beggar to himself; “does the man think that a big
pie will comfort me for the loss of three hundred pieces of money?”
 Nevertheless, as it was the best thing to be had, into the pantry the
beggar went and there began to feel and weigh the pies, and the one
filled with the rusty nails and scraps of iron was ever so much the
fatter and the heavier.

“This is the one that I shall take,” said he to the rich man, “and you
may have the other.” And, tucking it under his arm, off he tramped.

Well, before he got back to the town he grew hungry, and sat down by the
roadside to eat his pie; and if there was ever an angry man in the world
before, he was one that day--for there was his pie full of nothing but
rusty nails and bits of iron. “This is the way the rich always treat the
poor,” said he.

So back he went in a fume. “What did you give me a pie full of old nails
for?” said he.

“You took the pie of your own choice,” said the rich man; “nevertheless,
I meant you no harm. Lodge with me here one night, and in the morning I
will give you something better worth while, maybe.”

So that night the rich man had his wife bake two loaves of bread, in one
of which she hid the bag with the three hundred pieces of gold money.

“Go to the pantry,” said the rich man to the beggar in the morning, “and
there you will find two loaves of bread--one is for you and one for me;
take whichever one you choose.”

So in went the beggar, and the first loaf of bread he laid his hand upon
was the one in which the money was hidden, and off he marched with it
under his arm, without so much as saying thank you.

“I wonder,” said he to himself, after he had jogged along awhile--“I
wonder whether the rich man is up to another trick such as he played
upon me yesterday?” He put the loaf of bread to his ear and shook it and
shook it, and what should he hear but the chink of the money within. “Ah
ha!” said he, “he has filled it with rusty nails and bits of iron again,
but I will get the better of him this time.”

By-and-by he met a poor woman coming home from market. “Would you like
to buy a fine fresh loaf of bread?” said the beggar.

“Yes, I would,” said the woman.

“Well, here is one you may have for two pennies,” said the beggar.

That was cheap enough, so the woman paid him his price and off she went
with the loaf of bread under her arm, and never stopped until she had
come to her home.

Now it happened that the day before this very woman had borrowed just
such a loaf of bread from the rich man’s wife; and so, as there was
plenty in the house without it, she wrapped this loaf up in a napkin,
and sent her husband back with it to where it had started from first of
all.

“Well,” said the rich man to his wife, “the way of Heaven is not to be
changed.” And so he laid the money on the shelf until he who had given
it to him should come again, and thought no more of giving it to the
beggar.

At the end of seven days the king called upon the rich man again, and
this time he came in his own guise as a real king. “Well,” said he, “is
the poor man the richer for his money?”

“No,” said the rich man, “he is not;” and then he told the whole story
from beginning to end just as I have told it.

“Your father was right,” said the king; “and what he said was very
true--Much shall have more and little shall have less.’ Keep the bag of
money for yourself, for there Heaven means it to stay.”

And maybe there is as much truth as poetry in this story.


And now it was the turn of the Blacksmith who had made Death sit in his
pear-tree until the cold wind whistled through the ribs of man’s enemy.
He was a big, burly man, with a bullet head, and a great thick neck, and
a voice like a bull’s.

“Do you mind,” said he, “about how I clapped a man in the fire and
cooked him to a crisp that day that St. Peter came travelling my way?”

There was a little space of silence, and then the Soldier who had
cheated the Devil spoke up. “Why yes, friend,” said he, “I know your
story very well.”

“I am not so fortunate,” said old Bidpai. “I do not know your story.
Tell me, friend, did you really bake a man to a crisp? And how was it
then?”

“Why,” said the Blacksmith, “I was trying to do what a better man than
I did, and where he hit the mark I missed it by an ell. Twas a pretty
scrape I was in that day.”

“But how did it happen?” said Bidpai.

“It happened,” said the Blacksmith, “just as it is going to happen in
the story I am about to tell.”

“And what is your story about?” said Fortunatus.

“It is,” said the Blacksmith, “about--”




Wisdom’s Wages and Folly’s Pay

Once upon a time there was a wise man of wise men, and a great magician
to boot, and his name was Doctor Simon Agricola.

Once upon a time there was a simpleton of simpletons, and a great booby
to boot, and his name was Babo.

Simon Agricola had read all the books written by man, and could do more
magic than any conjurer that ever lived. But, nevertheless, he was
none too well off in the world; his clothes were patched, and his shoes
gaped, and that is the way with many another wise man of whom I have
heard tell.

Babo gathered rushes for a chair-maker, and he also had too few of the
good things to make life easy. But it is nothing out of the way for a
simpleton to be in that case.

The two of them lived neighbor to neighbor, the one in the next house
to the other, and so far as the world could see there was not a pin to
choose between them--only that one was called a wise man and the other a
simpleton.

One day the weather was cold, and when Babo came home from gathering
rushes he found no fire in the house. So off he went to his neighbor the
wise man. “Will you give me a live coal to start my fire?” said he.

“Yes, I will do that,” said Simon Agricola; “But how will you carry the
coal home?”

“Oh!” said Babo, “I will just take it in my hand.”

“In your hand?”

“In my hand.”

“Can you carry a live coal in your hand?”

“Oh yes!” said Babo; “I can do that easily enough.”

“Well, I should like to see you do it,” said Simon Agricola.

“Then I will show you,” said Babo. He spread a bed of cold, dead ashes
upon his palm. “Now,” said he, “I will take the ember upon that.”

Agricola rolled up his eyes like a duck in a thunder-storm. “Well,” said
he, “I have lived more than seventy years, and have read all the books
in the world; I have practised magic and necromancy, and know all about
algebra and geometry, and yet, wise as I am, I never thought of this
little thing.”

That is the way with your wise man.

“Pooh!” said Babo; “that is nothing. I know how to do many more tricks
than that.”

“Do you?” said Simon Agricola; “then listen: to-morrow I am going out
into the world to make my fortune, for little or nothing is to be had in
this town. If you will go along with me I will make your fortune also.”

“Very well,” said Babo, and the bargain was struck. So the next morning
bright and early off they started upon their journey, cheek by jowl, the
wise man and the simpleton, to make their fortunes in the wide world,
and the two of them made a pair. On they jogged and on they jogged,
and the way was none too smooth. By-and-by they came to a great field
covered all over with round stones.

“Let us each take one of these,” said Simon Agricola; “they will be of
use by-and-by;” and, as he spoke, he picked up a great stone as big as
his two fists, and dropped it into the pouch that dangled at his side.

“Not I,” said Babo; “I will carry no stone with me. It is as much as my
two legs can do to carry my body, let along lugging a great stone into
the bargain.”

“Very well,” said Agricola; “born a fool, live a fool, die a fool.’” And
on he tramped, with Babo at his heels.

At last they came to a great wide plain, where, far or near, nothing was
to be seen but bare sand, without so much as a pebble or a single blade
of grass, and there night caught up with them.

“Dear, dear, but I am hungry!” said Babo.

“So am I,” said Simon Agricola. “Let’s sit down here and eat.”

So down they sat, and Simon Agricola opened his pouch and drew forth the
stone.

The stone? It was a stone no longer, but a fine loaf of white bread as
big as your two fists. You should have seen Babo goggle and stare! “Give
me a piece of your bread, master,” said he.

“Not I,” said Agricola. “You might have had a dozen of the same kind,
had you chosen to do as I bade you and to fetch them along with you.
Born a fool, live a fool, die a fool,’” said he; and that was all that
Babo got for his supper. As for the wise man, he finished his loaf of
bread to the last crumb, and then went to sleep with a full stomach and
a contented mind.

The next morning off they started again bright and early, and before
long they came to just such another field of stones as they left behind
them the day before.

“Come, master,” said Babo, “let us each take a stone with us. We may
need something more to eat before the day is over.”

“No,” said Simon Agricola; “we will need no stones to-day.”

But Babo had no notion to go hungry the second time, so he hunted around
till he found a stone as big as his head. All day he carried it, first
under one arm, and then under the other. The wise man stepped along
briskly enough, but the sweat ran down Babo’s face like drops on the
window in an April shower. At last they came to a great wide plain,
where neither stock nor stone was to be seen, but only a gallows-tree,
upon which one poor wight hung dancing upon nothing at all, and there
night caught them again.

“Aha!” said Babo to himself. “This time I shall have bread and my master
none.”

But listen to what happened. Up stepped the wise man to the gallows, and
gave it a sharp rap with his staff. Then, lo and behold! The gallows was
gone, and in its place stood a fine inn, with lights in the windows, and
a landlord bowing and smiling in the doorway, and a fire roaring in
the kitchen, and the smell of good things cooking filling the air all
around, so that only to sniff did one’s heart good.

Poor Babo let fall the stone he had carried all day. A stone it was, and
a stone he let fall.

“Born a fool, live a fool, die a fool,’” said Agricola. “But come in,
Babo, come in; here is room enough for two.” So that night Babo had a
good supper and a sound sleep, and that is a cure for most of a body’s
troubles in this world.

The third day of their travelling they came to farms and villages, and
there Simon Agricola began to think of showing some of those tricks of
magic that were to make his fortune and Babo’s into the bargain.

At last they came to a blacksmith’s shop, and there was the smith hard
at work, dinging and donging, and making sweet music with hammer and
anvil. In walked Simon Agricola and gave him good-day. He put his
fingers into his purse, and brought out all the money he had in
the world; it was one golden angel. “Look, friend,” said he to the
blacksmith; “if you will let me have your forge for one hour, I will
give you this money for the use of it.”

The blacksmith liked the tune of that song very well. “You may have it,”
 said he; and he took off his leathern apron without another word, and
Simon Agricola put it on in his stead.

Presently, who should come riding up to the blacksmith’s shop but a rich
old nobleman and three servants. The servants were hale, stout fellows,
but the nobleman was as withered as a winter leaf. “Can you shoe my
horse?” said he to Simon Agricola, for he took him to be the smith
because of his leathern apron.

“No,” says Simon Agricola; “that is not my trade: I only know how to
make old people young.”

“Old people young!” said the old nobleman; “can you make me young
again?”

“Yes,” said Simon Agricola, “I can, but I must have a thousand golden
angels for doing it.”

“Very well,” said the old nobleman; “make me young, and you shall have
them and welcome.”

So Simon Agricola gave the word, and Babo blew the bellows until the
fire blazed and roared. Then the doctor caught the old nobleman, and
laid him upon the forge. He heaped the coals over him, and turned him
this way and that, until he grew red-hot, like a piece of iron. Then he
drew him forth from the fire and dipped him in the water-tank. Phizz!
The water hissed, and the steam rose up in a cloud; and when Simon
Agricola took the old nobleman out, lo and behold! He was as fresh and
blooming and lusty as a lad of twenty.

But you should have seen how all the people stared and goggled!--Babo
and the blacksmith and the nobleman’s servants. The nobleman strutted up
and down for a while, admiring himself, and then he got upon his
horse again. “But wait,” said Simon Agricola; “you forgot to pay me my
thousand golden angels.”

“Pooh!” said the nobleman, and off he clattered, with his servants at
his heels; and that was all the good that Simon Agricola had of this
trick. But ill-luck was not done with him yet, for when the smith saw
how matters had turned out, he laid hold of the doctor and would not let
him go until he had paid him the golden angel he had promised for the
use of the forge. The doctor pulled a sour face, but all the same he
had to pay the angel. Then the smith let him go, and off he marched in a
huff.

Outside of the forge was the smith’s mother--a poor old creature,
withered and twisted and bent as a winter twig. Babo had kept his eyes
open, and had not travelled with Simon Agricola for nothing. He plucked
the smith by the sleeve: “Look’ee, friend,” said he, “how would you like
me to make your mother, over yonder, young again?”

“I should like nothing better,” said the smith.

“Very well,” said Babo; “give me the golden angel that the master gave
you, and I’ll do the job for you.”

Well, the smith paid the money, and Babo bade him blow the bellows. When
the fire roared up good and hot, he caught up the old mother, and, in
spite of her scratching and squalling, he laid her upon the embers.
By-and-by, when he thought the right time had come, he took her out and
dipped her in the tank of water; but instead of turning young, there she
lay, as dumb as a fish and as black as coal.

When the blacksmith saw what Babo had done to his mother, he caught him
by the collar, and fell to giving him such a dressing down as never man
had before.

“Help!” bawled Babo. “Help! Murder!”

Such a hubbub had not been heard in that town for many a day. Back came
Simon Agricola running, and there he saw, and took it all in in one
look.

“Stop, friend,” said he to the smith, “let the simpleton go; this is not
past mending yet.”

“Very well,” said the smith; “but he must give me back my golden angel,
and you must cure my mother, or else I’ll have you both up before the
judge.”

“It shall be done,” said Simon Agricola; so Babo paid back the money,
and the doctor dipped the woman in the water. When he brought her out
she was as well and strong as ever--but just as old as she had been
before.

“Now be off for a pair of scamps, both of you,” said the blacksmith;
“and if you ever come this way again, I’ll set all the dogs in the town
upon you.”

Simon Agricola said nothing until they had come out upon the highway
again, and left the town well behind them; then--“Born a fool, live a
fool, die a fool!” says he.

Babo said nothing, but he rubbed the places where the smith had dusted
his coat.

The fourth day of their journey they came to a town, and here Simon
Agricola was for trying his tricks of magic again. He and Babo took
up their stand in the corner of the market-place, and began bawling,
“Doctor Knowall! Doctor Knowall! Who has come from the other end of
Nowhere! He can cure any sickness or pain! He can bring you back from
the gates of death! Here is Doctor Knowall! Here is Doctor Knowall!”

Now there was a very, very rich man in that town, whose daughter lay
sick to death; and when the news of this great doctor was brought to his
ears, he was for having him try his hand at curing the girl.

“Very well,” said Simon Agricola, “I will do that, but you must pay me
two thousand golden angels.”

“Two thousand golden angels!” said the rich man; “that is a great deal
of money, but you shall have it if only you will cure my daughter.”

Simon Agricola drew a little vial from his bosom. From it he poured
just six drops of yellow liquor upon the girl’s tongue. Then--lo and
behold!--up she sat in bed as well and strong as ever, and asked for a
boiled chicken and a dumpling, by way of something to eat.

“Bless you! Bless you!” said the rich man.

“Yes, yes; blessings are very good, but I would like to have my two
thousand golden angels,” said Simon Agricola.

“Two thousand golden angels! I said nothing about two thousand golden
angels,” said the rich man; “two thousand fiddlesticks!” said he. “Pooh!
Pooh! You must have been dreaming! See, here are two hundred silver
pennies, and that is enough and more than enough for six drops of
medicine.”

“I want my two thousand golden angels,” said Simon Agricola.

“You will get nothing but two hundred pennies,” said the rich man.

“I won’t touch one of them,” said Simon Agricola, and off he marched in
a huff.

But Babo had kept his eyes open. Simon Agricola had laid down the vial
upon the table, and while they were saying this and that back and forth,
thinking of nothing else, Babo quietly slipped it into his own pocket,
without any one but himself being the wiser.

Down the stairs stumped the doctor with Babo at his heels. There stood
the cook waiting for them.

“Look,” said he, “my wife is sick in there; won’t you cure her, too?”

“Pooh!” said Simon Agricola; and out he went, banging the door behind
him.

“Look, friend,” said Babo to the cook, “here I have some of the same
medicine. Give me the two hundred pennies that the master would not
take, and I’ll cure her for you as sound as a bottle.”

“Very well,” said the cook, and he counted out the two hundred pennies,
and Babo slipped them into his pocket. He bade the woman open her mouth,
and when she had done so he poured all the stuff down her throat at
once.

“Ugh!” said she, and therewith rolled up her eyes, and lay as stiff and
dumb as a herring in a box.

When the cook saw what Babo had done, he snatched up the rolling-pin and
made at him to pound his head to a jelly. But Babo did not wait for his
coming; he jumped out of the window, and away he scampered with the cook
at his heels.

Well, the upshot of the business was that Simon Agricola had to go back
and bring life to the woman again, or the cook would thump him and Babo
both with the rolling-pin. And, what was more, Babo had to pay back the
two hundred pennies that the cook had given him for curing his wife.

The wise man made a cross upon the woman’s forehead, and up she sat, as
well--but no better--as before.

“And now be off,” said the cook, “or I will call the servants and give
you both a drubbing for a pair of scamps.”

Simon Agricola said never a word until they had gotten out of the town.
There his anger boiled over, like water into the fire. “Look,” said he
to Babo: “Born a fool, live a fool, die a fool.’ I want no more of you.
Here are two roads; you take one, and I will take the other.”

“What!” said Babo, “am I to travel the rest of the way alone? And then,
besides, how about the fortune you promised me?”

“Never mind that,” said Simon Agricola; “I have not made my own fortune
yet.”

“Well, at least pay me something for my wages,” said Babo.

“How shall I pay you?” said Simon Agricola. “I have not a single groat
in the world.”

“What!” said Babo, “have you nothing to give me?”

“I can give you a piece of advice.”

“Well,” said Babo, “that is better than nothing, so let me have it.”

“Here it is,” said Simon Agricola: “Think well! Think well!--before you
do what you are about to do, think well!’”

“Thank you!” said Babo; and then the one went one way, and the other the
other.

(You may go with the wise man if you choose, but I shall jog along with
the simpleton.)

After Babo had travelled for a while, he knew not whither, night caught
him, and he lay down under a hedge to sleep. There he lay, and snored
away like a saw-mill, for he was wearied with his long journeying.

Now it chanced that that same night two thieves had broken into a
miser’s house, and had stolen an iron pot full of gold money. Day broke
before they reached home, so down they sat to consider the matter; and
the place where they seated themselves was on the other side of the
hedge where Babo lay. The older thief was for carrying the money home
under his coat; the younger was for burying it until night had come
again. They squabbled and bickered and argued till the noise they made
wakened Babo, and he sat up. The first thing he thought of was the
advice that the doctor had given him the evening before.

“Think well!’” he bawled out; “think well! before you do what you are
about to do, think well!’”

When the two thieves heard Babo’s piece of advice, they thought that the
judge’s officers were after them for sure and certain. Down they dropped
the pot of money, and away they scampered as fast as their legs could
carry them.

Babo heard them running, and poked his head through the hedge, and there
lay the pot of gold. “Look now,” said he: “this has come from the advice
that was given me; no one ever gave me advice that was worth so much
before.” So he picked up the pot of gold, and off he marched with it.

He had not gone far before he met two of the king’s officers, and you
may guess how they opened their eyes when they saw him travelling along
the highway with a pot full of gold money.

“Where are you going with that money?” said they.

“I don’t know,” said Babo.

“How did you get it?” said they.

“I got it for a piece of advice,” said Babo.

For a piece of advice! No, no--the king’s officers knew butter from
lard, and truth from t’other thing. It was just the same in that country
as it is in our town--there was nothing in the world so cheap as advice.
Whoever heard of anybody giving a pot of gold and silver money for it?
Without another word they marched Babo and his pot of money off to the
king.

“Come,” said the king, “tell me truly; where did you get the pot of
money?”

Poor Babo began to whimper. “I got it for a piece of advice,” said he.

“Really and truly?” said the king.

“Yes,” said Babo; “really and truly.”

“Humph!” said the king. “I should like to have advice that is worth as
much as that. Now, how much will you sell your advice to me for?”

“How much will you give?” said Babo.

“Well,” said the king, “let me have it for a day on trial, and at the
end of that time I will pay you what it is worth.”

“Very well,” said Babo, “that is a bargain;” and so he lent the king his
piece of advice for one day on trial.

Now the chief councillor and some others had laid a plot against the
king’s life, and that morning it had been settled that when the barber
shaved him he was to cut his throat with a razor. So after the barber
had lathered his face he began to whet the razor, and to whet the razor.

Just at that moment the king remembered Babo’s piece of advice. “Think
well!” said he; “think well! Before you do what you are about to do,
think well!”

When the barber heard the words that the king said, he thought that
all had been discovered. Down he fell upon his knees, and confessed
everything.

That is how Babo’s advice saved the king’s life--you can guess whether
the king thought it was worth much or little. When Babo came the next
morning the king gave him ten chests full of money, and that made the
simpleton richer than anybody in all that land.

He built himself a fine house, and by-and-by married the daughter of the
new councillor that came after the other one’s head had been chopped off
for conspiring against the king’s life. Besides that, he came and went
about the king’s castle as he pleased, and the king made much of him.
Everybody bowed to him, and all were glad to stop and chat awhile with
him when they met him in the street.

One morning Babo looked out of the window, and who should he see come
travelling along the road but Simon Agricola himself, and he was just as
poor and dusty and travel-stained as ever.

“Come in, come in!” said Babo; and you can guess how the wise man stared
when he saw the simpleton living in such a fine way. But he opened his
eyes wider than ever when he heard that all these good things came from
the piece of advice he had given Babo that day they had parted at the
cross roads.

“Aye, aye!” said he, “the luck is with you for sure and certain. But
if you will pay me a thousand golden angels, I will give you something
better than a piece of advice. I will teach you all the magic that is to
be learned from the books.”

“No,” said Babo, “I am satisfied with the advice.”

“Very well,” said Simon Agricola, “Born a fool, live a fool, die a
fool’;” and off he went in a huff.

That is all of this tale except the tip end of it, and that I will give
you now.

I have heard tell that one day the king dropped in the street the piece
of advice that he had bought from Babo, and that before he found it
again it had been trampled into the mud and dirt. I cannot say for
certain that this is the truth, but it must have been spoiled in some
way or other, for I have never heard of anybody in these days who would
give even so much as a bad penny for it; and yet it is worth just as
much now as it was when Babo sold it to the king.


I had sat listening to these jolly folk for all this time, and I had not
heard old Sindbad say a word, and yet I knew very well he was full of
a story, for every now and then I could see his lips move, and he would
smile, and anon he would stroke his long white beard and smile again.

Everybody clapped their hands and rattled their canicans after the
Blacksmith had ended his story, and methought they liked it better
than almost anything that had been told. Then there was a pause, and
everybody was still, and as nobody else spoke I myself ventured to break
the silence. “I would like,” said I (and my voice sounded thin in my own
ears, as one’s voice always does sound in Twilight Land), “I would like
to hear our friend Sindbad the Sailor tell a story. Methinks one is
fermenting in his mind.”

Old Sindbad smiled until his cheeks crinkled into wrinkles.

“Aye,” said every one, “will you not tell a story?”

“To be sure I will,” said Sindbad. “I will tell you a good story,” said
he, “and it is about--”




The Enchanted Island.

But it is not always the lucky one that carries away the plums;
sometimes he only shakes the tree, and the wise man pockets the fruit.

Once upon a long, long time ago, and in a country far, far away, there
lived two men in the same town and both were named Selim; one was Selim
the Baker and one was Selim the Fisherman.

Selim the Baker was well off in the world, but Selim the Fisherman was
only so-so. Selim the Baker always had plenty to eat and a warm corner
in cold weather, but many and many a time Selim the Fisherman’s stomach
went empty and his teeth went chattering.

Once it happened that for time after time Selim the Fisherman caught
nothing but bad luck in his nets, and not so much as a single sprat,
and he was very hungry. “Come,” said he to himself, “those who have some
should surely give to those who have none,” and so he went to Selim the
Baker. “Let me have a loaf of bread,” said he, “and I will pay you for
it tomorrow.”

“Very well,” said Selim the Baker; “I will let you have a loaf of bread,
if you will give me all that you catch in your nets to-morrow.”

“So be it,” said Selim the Fisherman, for need drives one to hard
bargains sometimes; and therewith he got his loaf of bread.

So the next day Selim the Fisherman fished and fished and fished and
fished, and still he caught no more than the day before; until just
at sunset he cast his net for the last time for the day, and, lo and
behold! There was something heavy in it. So he dragged it ashore, and
what should it be but a leaden box, sealed as tight as wax, and covered
with all manner of strange letters and figures. “Here,” said he, “is
something to pay for my bread of yesterday, at any rate;” and as he was
an honest man, off he marched with it to Selim the Baker.

They opened the box in the baker’s shop, and within they found two rolls
of yellow linen. In each of the rolls of linen was another little leaden
box: in one was a finger-ring of gold set with a red stone, in the other
was a finger-ring of iron set with nothing at all.

That was all the box held; nevertheless, that was the greatest catch
that ever any fisherman made in the world; for, though Selim the one or
Selim the other knew no more of the matter than the cat under the stove,
the gold ring was the Ring of Luck and the iron ring was the Ring of
Wisdom.

Inside of the gold ring were carved these letters: “Whosoever wears me,
shall have that which all men seek--for so it is with good-luck in this
world.”

Inside of the iron ring were written these words: “Whosoever wears me,
shall have that which few men care for--and that is the way it is with
wisdom in our town.”

“Well,” said Selim the Baker, and he slipped the gold ring of good-luck
on his finger, “I have driven a good bargain, and you have paid for your
loaf of bread.”

“But what will you do with the other ring?” said Selim the Fisherman.

“Oh, you may have that,” said Selim the Baker.

Well, that evening, as Selim the Baker sat in front of his shop in the
twilight smoking a pipe of tobacco, the ring he wore began to work. Up
came a little old man with a white beard, and he was dressed all in gray
from top to toe, and he wore a black velvet cap, and he carried a long
staff in his hand. He stopped in front of Selim the Baker, and stood
looking at him a long, long time. At last--“Is your name Selim?” said
he.

“Yes,” said Selim the Baker, “it is.”

“And do you wear a gold ring with a red stone on your finger?”

“Yes,” said Selim, “I do.”

“Then come with me,” said the little old man, “and I will show you the
wonder of the world.”

“Well,” said Selim the Baker, “that will be worth the seeing, at any
rate.” So he emptied out his pipe of tobacco, and put on his hat and
followed the way the old man led.

Up one street they went, and down another, and here and there through
alleys and byways where Selim had never been before. At last they came
to where a high wall ran along the narrow street, with a garden behind
it, and by-and-by to an iron gate. The old man rapped upon the gate
three times with his knuckles, and cried in a loud voice, “Open to
Selim, who wears the Ring of Luck!”

Then instantly the gate swung open, and Selim the Baker followed the old
man into the garden.

Bang! shut the gate behind him, and there he was.

There he was! And such a place he had never seen before. Such fruit!
Such flowers! Such fountains! Such summer-houses!

“This is nothing,” said the old man; “this is only the beginning of
wonder. Come with me.”

He led the way down a long pathway between the trees, and Selim
followed. By-and-by, far away, they saw the light of torches; and when
they came to what they saw, lo and behold! there was the sea-shore, and
a boat with four-and-twenty oarsmen, each dressed in cloth of gold and
silver more splendidly than a prince. And there were four-and-twenty
black slaves, carrying each a torch of spice-wood, so that all the
air was filled with sweet smells. The old man led the way, and Selim,
following, entered the boat; and there was a seat for him made soft with
satin cushions embroidered with gold and precious stones and stuffed
with down, and Selim wondered whether he was not dreaming.

The oarsmen pushed off from the shore and away they rowed.

On they rowed and on they rowed for all that livelong night.

At last morning broke, and then as the sun rose Selim saw such a sight
as never mortal eyes beheld before or since. It was the wonder of
wonders--a great city built on an island. The island was all one
mountain; and on it, one above another and another above that again,
stood palaces that glistened like snow, and orchards of fruit, and
gardens of flowers and green trees.

And as the boat came nearer and nearer to the city, Selim could see that
all around on the house-tops and down to the water’s edge were crowds
and crowds of people. All were looking out towards the sea, and when
they saw the boat and Selim in it, a great shout went up like the
roaring of rushing waters.

“It is the King!” they cried--“it is the King! It is Selim the King!”

Then the boat landed, and there stood dozens of scores of great princes
and nobles to welcome Selim when he came ashore. And there was a white
horse waiting for him to ride, and its saddle and bridle were studded
with diamonds and rubies and emeralds that sparkled and glistened like
the stars in heaven, and Selim thought for sure he must be dreaming with
his eyes open.

But he was not dreaming, for it was all as true as that eggs are eggs.
So up the hill he rode, and to the grandest and the most splendid of all
the splendid palaces, the princes and noblemen riding with him, and the
crowd shouting as though to split their throats.

And what a palace it was!--as white as snow and painted all inside
with gold and blue. All around it were gardens blooming with fruit and
flowers, and the like of it mortal man never saw in the world before.

There they made a king of Selim, and put a golden crown on his head; and
that is what the Ring of Good Luck can do for a baker.

But wait a bit! There was something queer about it all, and that is now
to be told.

All that day was feasting and drinking and merry-making, and the
twinging and twanging of music, and dancing of beautiful dancing-girls,
and such things as Selim had never heard tell of in all his life before.
And when night came they lit thousands and thousands of candles of
perfumed wax; so that it was a hard matter to say when night began and
day ended, only that the one smelled sweeter than the other.

But at last it came midnight, and then suddenly, in an instant, all the
lights went out and everything was as dark as pitch--not a spark, not
a glimmer anywhere. And, just as suddenly, all the sound of music and
dancing and merrymaking ceased, and everybody began to wail and cry
until it was enough to wring one’s heart to hear. Then, in the midst of
all the wailing and crying, a door was flung open, and in came six tall
and terrible black men, dressed all in black from top to toe, carrying
each a flaming torch; and by the light of the torches King Selim saw
that all--the princes, the noblemen, the dancing-girls--all lay on their
faces on the floor.

The six men took King Selim--who shuddered and shook with fear--by the
arms, and marched him through dark, gloomy entries and passage-ways,
until they came at last to the very heart of the palace.

There was a great high-vaulted room all of black marble, and in the
middle of it was a pedestal with seven steps, all of black marble; and
on the pedestal stood a stone statue of a woman looking as natural as
life, only that her eyes were shut. The statue was dressed like a queen:
she wore a golden crown on her head, and upon her body hung golden
robes, set with diamonds and emeralds and rubies and sapphires and
pearls and all sorts of precious stones.

As for the face of the statue, white paper and black ink could not tell
you how beautiful it was. When Selim looked at it, it made his heart
stand still in his breast, it was so beautiful.

The six men brought Selim up in front of the statue, and then a voice
came as though from the vaulted roof: “Selim! Selim! Selim!” it said,
“what are thou doing? To-day is feasting and drinking and merry-making,
but beware of tomorrow!”

As soon as these words were ended the six black men marched King Selim
back whence they had brought him; there they left him and passed out one
by one as they had first come in, and the door shut to behind them.

Then in an instant the lights flashed out again, the music began to
play and the people began to talk and laugh, and King Selim thought that
maybe all that had just passed was only a bit of an ugly dream after
all.

So that is the way King Selim the Baker began to reign, and that is the
way he continued to reign. All day was feasting and drinking and making
merry and music and laughing and talking. But every night at midnight
the same thing happened: the lights went out, all the people began
wailing and crying, and the six tall, terrible black men came with
flashing torches and marched King Selim away to the beautiful statue.
And every night the same voice said--“Selim! Selim! Selim! What art thou
doing! To-day is feasting and drinking and merry-making; but beware of
tomorrow!”

So things went on for a twelvemonth, and at last came the end of the
year. That day and night the merry-making was merrier and wilder and
madder than it had ever been before, but the great clock in the tower
went on--tick, tock! tick, tock!--and by and by it came midnight. Then,
as it always happened before, the lights went out, and all was as
black as ink. But this time there was no wailing and crying out, but
everything was silent as death; the door opened slowly, and in came, not
six black men as before, but nine men as silent as death, dressed all in
flaming red, and the torches they carried burned as red as blood. They
took King Selim by the arms, just as the six men had done, and marched
him through the same entries and passageways, and so came at last to
the same vaulted room. There stood the statue, but now it was turned to
flesh and blood, and the eyes were open and looking straight at Selim
the Baker.

“Art thou Selim?” said she; and she pointed her finger straight at him.

“Yes, I am Selim,” said he.

“And dost thou wear the gold ring with the red stone?” said she.

“Yes,” said he; “I have it on my finger.”

“And dost thou wear the iron ring?”

“No,” said he; “I gave that to Selim the Fisherman.”

The words had hardly left his lips when the statue gave a great cry and
clapped her hands together. In an instant an echoing cry sounded all
over the town--a shriek fit to split the ears.

The next moment there came another sound--a sound like thunder--above
and below and everywhere. The earth began to shake and to rock, and the
houses began to topple and fall, and the people began to scream and to
yell and to shout, and the waters of the sea began to lash and to roar,
and the wind began to bellow and howl. Then it was a good thing for King
Selim that he wore Luck’s Ring; for, though all the beautiful snow-white
palace about him and above him began to crumble to pieces like slaked
lime, the sticks and the stones and the beams to fall this side of him
and that, he crawled out from under it without a scratch or a bruise,
like a rat out of a cellar.

That is what Luck’s Ring did for him.

But his troubles were not over yet; for, just as he came out from under
all the ruin, the island began to sink down into the water, carrying
everything along with it--that is, everything but him and one thing
else. That one other thing was an empty boat, and King Selim climbed
into it, and nothing else saved him from drowning. It was Luck’s Ring
that did that for him also.

The boat floated on and on until it came to another island that was just
like the island he had left, only that there was neither tree nor blade
of grass nor hide nor hair nor living thing of any kind. Nevertheless,
it was an island just like the other: a high mountain and nothing else.
There Selim the Baker went ashore, and there he would have starved to
death only for Luck’s Ring; for one day a boat came sailing by, and when
poor Selim shouted, those aboard heard him and came and took him off.
How they all stared to see his golden crown--for he still wore it--and
his robes of silk and satin and the gold and jewels!

Before they would consent to carry him away, they made him give up all
the fine things he had. Then they took him home again to the town whence
he had first come, just as poor as when he had started. Back he went to
his bake-shop and his ovens, and the first thing he did was to take off
his gold ring and put it on the shelf.

“If that is the ring of good luck,” said he, “I do not want to wear the
like of it.”

That is the way with mortal man: for one has to have the Ring of Wisdom
as well, to turn the Ring of Luck to good account.

And now for Selim the Fisherman.

Well, thus it happened to him. For a while he carried the iron ring
around in his pocket--just as so many of us do--without thinking to put
it on. But one day he slipped it on his finger--and that is what we do
not all of us do. After that he never took it off again, and the world
went smoothly with him. He was not rich, but then he was not poor; he
was not merry, neither was he sad. He always had enough and was thankful
for it, for I never yet knew wisdom to go begging or crying.

So he went his way and he fished his fish, and twelve months and a week
or more passed by. Then one day he went past the baker shop and there
sat Selim the Baker smoking his pipe of tobacco.

“So, friend,” said Selim the Fisherman, “you are back again in the old
place, I see.”

“Yes,” said the other Selim; “awhile ago I was a king, and now I
am nothing but a baker again. As for that gold ring with the red
stone--they may say it is Luck’s Ring if they choose, but when next I
wear it may I be hanged.”

Thereupon he told Selim the Fisherman the story of what had happened to
him with all its ins and outs, just as I have told it to you.

“Well!” said Selim the Fisherman, “I should like to have a sight of that
island myself. If you want the ring no longer, just let me have it; for
maybe if I wear it something of the kind will happen to me.”

“You may have it,” said Selim the Baker. “Yonder it is, and you are
welcome to it.”

So Selim the Fisherman put on the ring, and then went his way about his
own business.

That night, as he came home carrying his nets over his shoulder, whom
should he meet but the little old man in gray, with the white beard and
the black cap on his head and the long staff in his hand.

“Is your name Selim?” said the little man, just as he had done to Selim
the Baker.

“Yes,” said Selim; “it is.”

“And do you wear a gold ring with a red stone?” said the little old man,
just as he had said before.

“Yes,” said Selim; “I do.”

“Then come with me,” said the little old man, “and I will show you the
wonder of the world.”

Selim the Fisherman remembered all that Selim the Baker had told him,
and he took no two thoughts as to what to do. Down he tumbled his nets,
and away he went after the other as fast as his legs could carry him.
Here they went and there they went, up crooked streets and lanes and
down by-ways and alley-ways, until at last they came to the same garden
to which Selim the Baker had been brought. Then the old man knocked at
the gate three times and cried out in a loud voice, “Open! Open! Open to
Selim who wears the Ring of Luck!”

Then the gate opened, and in they went. Fine as it all was, Selim
the Fisherman cared to look neither to the right nor to the left, but
straight after the old man he went, until at last they came to the
seaside and the boat and the four-and-twenty oarsmen dressed like
princes and the black slaves with the perfumed torches.

Here the old man entered the boat and Selim after him, and away they
sailed.

To make a long story short, everything happened to Selim the Fisherman
just as it had happened to Selim the Baker. At dawn of day they came to
the island and the city built on the mountain. And the palaces were just
as white and beautiful, and the gardens and orchards just as fresh and
blooming as though they had not all tumbled down and sunk under the
water a week before, almost carrying poor Selim the Baker with them.
There were the people dressed in silks and satins and jewels, just as
Selim the Baker had found them, and they shouted and hurrahed for Selim
the Fisherman just as they had shouted and hurrahed for the other.
There were the princes and the nobles and the white horse, and Selim the
Fisherman got on his back and rode up to a dazzling snow-white palace,
and they put a crown on his head and made a king of him, just as they
had made a king of Selim the Baker.

That night, at midnight, it happened just as it had happened before.
Suddenly, as the hour struck, the lights all went out, and there was a
moaning and a crying enough to make the heart curdle. Then the door
flew open, and in came the six terrible black men with torches. They
led Selim the Fisherman through damp and dismal entries and passage-ways
until they came to the vaulted room of black marble, and there stood
the beautiful statue on its black pedestal. Then came the voice from
above--“Selim! Selim! Selim!” it cried, “what art thou doing? To-day is
feasting and drinking and merry-making, but beware of to-morrow!”

But Selim the Fisherman did not stand still and listen, as Selim the
Baker had done. He called out, “I hear the words! I am listening! I will
beware to-day for the sake of to-morrow!”

I do not know what I should have done had I been king of that island and
had I known that in a twelve-month it would all come tumbling down about
my ears and sink into the sea, maybe carry me along with it. This is
what Selim the Fisherman did [but then he wore the iron Ring of Wisdom
on his finger, and I never had that upon mine]:

First of all, he called the wisest men of the island to him, and found
from them just where the other desert island lay upon which the boat
with Selim the Baker in it had drifted.

Then, when he had learned where it was to be found, he sent armies and
armies of men and built on that island palaces and houses, and planted
there orchards and gardens, just like the palaces and the orchards and
the gardens about him--only a great deal finer. Then he sent fleets and
fleets of ships, and carried everything away from the island where he
lived to that other island--all the men and the women and the children;
all the flocks and herds and every living thing; all the fowls and the
birds and everything that wore feathers; all the gold and the silver and
the jewels and the silks and the satins, and whatever was of any good
or of any use; and when all these things were done, there were still two
days left till the end of the year.

Upon the first of these two days he sent over the beautiful statue and
had it set up in the very midst of the splendid new palace he had built.

Upon the second day he went over himself, leaving behind him nothing but
the dead mountain and the rocks and the empty houses.

So came the end of the twelve months.

So came midnight.

Out went all the lights in the new palace, and everything was as silent
as death and as black as ink. The door opened, and in came the nine
men in red, with torches burning as red as blood. They took Selim the
Fisherman by the arms and led him to the beautiful statue, and there she
was with her eyes open.

“Are you Selim?” said she.

“Yes, I am Selim,” said he.

“And do you wear the iron Ring of Wisdom?” said she.

“Yes, I do,” said he; and so he did.

There was no roaring and thundering, there was no shaking and quaking,
there was no toppling and tumbling, there was no splashing and dashing:
for this island was solid rock, and was not all enchantment and hollow
inside and underneath like the other which he had left behind.

The beautiful statue smiled until the place lit up as though the sun
shone. Down she came from the pedestal where she stood and kissed Selim
the Fisherman on the lips.

Then instantly the lights blazed everywhere, and the people shouted and
cheered, and the music played. But neither Selim the Fisherman nor the
beautiful statue saw or heard anything.

“I have done all this for you!” said Selim the Fisherman.

“And I have been waiting for you a thousand years!” said the beautiful
statue--only she was not a statue any longer.

After that they were married, and Selim the Fisherman and the enchanted
statue became king and queen in real earnest.

I think Selim the Fisherman sent for Selim the Baker and made him rich
and happy--I hope he did--I am sure he did.

So, after all, it is not always the lucky one who gathers the plums when
wisdom is by to pick up what the other shakes down.


I could say more; for, O little children! little children! there is
more than meat in many an egg-shell; and many a fool tells a story that
joggles a wise man’s wits, and many a man dances and junkets in his
fool’s paradise till it comes tumbling down about his ears some day; and
there are few men who are like Selim the Fisherman, who wear the Ring of
Wisdom on their finger, and, alack-a-day! I am not one of them, and that
is the end of this story.


Old Bidpai nodded his head. “Aye, aye,” said he, “there is a very good
moral in that story, my friend. It is, as a certain philosopher said,
very true, that there is more in an egg than the meat. And truly,
methinks, there is more in thy story than the story of itself.” He
nodded his head again and stroked his beard slowly, puffing out as he
did so as a great reflective cloud of smoke, through which his eyes
shone and twinkled mistily like stars through a cloud.

“And whose turn is it now?” said Doctor Faustus.

“Methinks tis mine,” said Boots--he who in fairy-tale always sat in the
ashes at home and yet married a princess after he had gone out into the
world awhile. “My story,” said he, “hath no moral, but, all the same, it
is as true as that eggs hatch chickens.” Then, without waiting for any
one to say another word, he began it in these words. “I am going to tell
you,” said he, how--





All Things are as Fate wills.

Once upon a time, in the old, old days, there lived a king who had a
head upon his shoulders wiser than other folk, and this was why: though
he was richer and wiser and greater than most kings, and had all that he
wanted and more into the bargain, he was so afraid of becoming proud of
his own prosperity that he had these words written in letters of gold
upon the walls of each and every room in his palace:

All Things are as Fate wills.

Now, by-and-by and after a while the king died; for when his time comes,
even the rich and the wise man must die, as well as the poor and the
simple man. So the king’s son came, in turn, to be king of that land;
and, though he was not so bad as the world of men goes, he was not the
man that his father was, as this story will show you.

One day, as he sat with his chief councillor, his eyes fell upon the
words written in letters of gold upon the wall--the words that his
father had written there in time gone by:

All Things are as Fate wills; and the young king did not like the taste
of them, for he was very proud of his own greatness. “That is not so,”
 said he, pointing to the words on the wall. “Let them be painted out,
and these words written in their place:

     All Things are as Man does.”

Now, the chief councillor was a grave old man, and had been councillor
to the young king’s father. “Do not be too hasty, my lord king,” said
he. “Try first the truth of your own words before you wipe out those
that your father has written.”

“Very well,” said the young king, “so be it. I will approve the truth of
my words. Bring me hither some beggar from the town whom Fate has made
poor, and I will make him rich. So I will show you that his life shall
be as I will, and not as Fate wills.”

Now, in that town there was a poor beggar-man who used to sit every
day beside the town gate, begging for something for charity’s sake.
Sometimes people gave him a penny or two, but it was little or nothing
that he got, for Fate was against him.

The same day that the king and the chief councillor had had their
talk together, as the beggar sat holding up his wooden bowl and asking
charity of those who passed by, there suddenly came three men who,
without saying a word, clapped hold of him and marched him off.

It was in vain that the beggar talked and questioned--in vain that he
begged and besought them to let him go. Not a word did they say to him,
either of good or bad. At last they came to a gate that led through a
high wall and into a garden, and there the three stopped, and one of
them knocked upon the gate. In answer to his knocking it flew open. He
thrust the beggar into the garden neck and crop, and then the gate was
banged to again.

But what a sight it was the beggar saw before his eyes!--flowers, and
fruit-trees, and marble walks, and a great fountain that shot up a
jet of water as white as snow. But he had not long to stand gaping and
staring around him, for in the garden were a great number of people,
who came hurrying to him, and who, without speaking a word to him or
answering a single question, or as much as giving him time to think,
led him to a marble bath of tepid water. There he was stripped of his
tattered clothes and washed as clean as snow. Then, as some of the
attendants dried him with fine linen towels, others came carrying
clothes fit for a prince to wear, and clad the beggar in them from head
to foot. After that, still without saying a word, they let him out from
the bath again, and there he found still other attendants waiting for
him--two of them holding a milk-white horse, saddled and bridled, and
fit for an emperor to ride. These helped him to mount, and then, leaping
into their own saddles, rode away with the beggar in their midst.

They rode of the garden and into the streets, and on and on they went
until they came to the king’s palace, and there they stopped. Courtiers
and noblemen and great lords were waiting for their coming, some of whom
helped him to dismount from the horse, for by this time the beggar was
so overcome with wonder that he stared like one moon-struck, and as
though his wits were addled. Then, leading the way up the palace steps,
they conducted him from room to room, until at last they came to one
more grand and splendid than all the rest, and there sat the king
himself waiting for the beggar’s coming.

The beggar would have flung himself at the king’s feet, but the king
would not let him; for he came down from the throne where he sat, and,
taking the beggar by the hand, led him up and sat him alongside of him.
Then the king gave orders to the attendants who stood about, and a feast
was served in plates of solid gold upon a table-cloth of silver--a feast
such as the beggar had never dreamed of, and the poor man ate as he had
never eaten in his life before.

All the while that the king and the beggar were eating, musicians played
sweet music and dancers danced and singers sang.

Then when the feast was over there came ten young men, bringing flasks
and flagons of all kinds, full of the best wine in the world; and the
beggar drank as he had never drank in his life before, and until his
head spun like a top.

So the king and the beggar feasted and made merry, until at last the
clock struck twelve and the king arose from his seat. “My friend,” said
he to the beggar, “all these things have been done to show you that Luck
and Fate, which have been against you for all these years, are now for
you. Hereafter, instead of being poor you shall be the richest of
the rich, for I will give you the greatest thing that I have in my
treasury,” Then he called the chief treasurer, who came forward with a
golden tray in his hand. Upon the tray was a purse of silk. “See,” said
the king, “here is a purse, and in the purse are one hundred pieces of
gold money. But though that much may seem great to you, it is but little
of the true value of the purse. Its virtue lies in this: that however
much you may take from it, there will always be one hundred pieces of
gold money left in it. Now go; and while you are enjoying the riches
which I give you, I have only to ask you to remember these are not the
gifts of Fate, but of a mortal man.”

But all the while he was talking the beggar’s head was spinning and
spinning, and buzzing and buzzing, so that he hardly heard a word of
what the king said.

Then when the king had ended his speech, the lords and gentlemen who had
brought the beggar in led him forth again. Out they went through room
after room--out through the courtyard, out through the gate.

Bang!--it was shut to behind him, and he found himself standing in the
darkness of midnight, with the splendid clothes upon his back, and the
magic purse with its hundred pieces of gold money in his pocket.

He stood looking about himself for a while, and then off he started
homeward, staggering and stumbling and shuffling, for the wine that he
had drank made him so light-headed that all the world spun topsy-turvy
around him.

His way led along by the river, and on he went stumbling and staggering.
All of a sudden--plump! splash!--he was in the water over head and ears.
Up he came, spitting out the water and shouting for help, splashing and
sputtering, and kicking and swimming, knowing no more where he was than
the man in the moon. Sometimes his head was under water and sometimes it
was up again.

At last, just as his strength was failing him, his feet struck the
bottom, and he crawled up on the shore more dead than alive. Then,
through fear and cold and wet, he swooned away, and lay for a long time
for all the world as though he were dead.

Now, it chanced that two fisherman were out with their nets that night,
and Luck or Fate led them by the way where the beggar lay on the shore.
“Halloa!” said one of the fishermen, “here is a poor body drowned!” They
turned him over, and then they saw what rich clothes he wore, and felt
that he had a purse in his pocket.

“Come,” said the second fisherman, “he is dead, whoever he is. His fine
clothes and his purse of money can do him no good now, and we might as
well have them as anybody else.” So between them both they stripped the
beggar of all that the king had given him, and left him lying on the
beach.

At daybreak the beggar awoke from the swoon, and there he found himself
lying without a stitch to his back, and half dead with the cold and the
water he had swallowed. Then, fearing lest somebody might see him, he
crawled away into the rushes that grew beside the river, there to hide
himself until night should come again.

But as he went, crawling upon hands and knees, he suddenly came upon a
bundle that had been washed up by the water, and when he laid eyes upon
it his heart leaped within him, for what should that bundle be but the
patches and tatters which he had worn the day before, and which the
attendants had thrown over the garden wall and into the river when they
had dressed him in the fine clothes the king gave him.

He spread his clothes out in the sun until they were dry, and then he
put them on and went back into the town again.

“Well,” said the king, that morning, to his chief councillor, “what do
you think now? Am I not greater than Fate? Did I not make the beggar
rich? And shall I not paint my father’s words out from the wall, and put
my own there instead?”

“I do not know,” said the councillor, shaking his head. “Let us first
see what has become of the beggar.”

“So be it,” said the king; and he and the councillor set off to see
whether the beggar had done as he ought to do with the good things that
the king had given him. So they came to the towngate, and there, lo and
behold! the first thing that they saw was the beggar with his wooden
bowl in his hand asking those who passed by for a stray penny or two.

When the king saw him he turned without a word, and rode back home
again. “Very well,” said he to the chief councillor, “I have tried to
make the beggar rich and have failed; nevertheless, if I cannot make him
I can ruin him in spite of Fate, and that I will show you.”

So all that while the beggar sat at the towngate and begged until came
noontide, when who should he see coming but the same three men who had
come for him the day before. “Ah, ha!” said he to himself, “now the
king is going to give me some more good things.” And so when the three
reached him he was willing enough to go with them, rough as they were.

Off they marched; but this time they did not come to any garden with
fruits and flowers and fountains and marble baths. Off they marched,
and when they stopped it was in front of the king’s palace. This time
no nobles and great lords and courtiers were waiting for his coming;
but instead of that the town hangman--a great ugly fellow, clad in black
from head to foot. Up he came to the beggar, and, catching him by the
scruff of his neck, dragged him up the palace steps and from room to
room until at last he flung him down at the king’s feet.

When the poor beggar gathered wits enough to look about him he saw there
a great chest standing wide open, and with holes in the lid. He wondered
what it was for, but the king gave him no chance to ask; for, beckoning
with his hand, the hangman and the others caught the beggar by arms and
legs, thrust him into the chest, and banged down the lid upon him.

The king locked it and double-locked it, and set his seal upon it; and
there was the beggar as tight as a fly in a bottle.

They carried the chest out and thrust it into a cart and hauled it away,
until at last they came to the sea-shore. There they flung chest and
all into the water, and it floated away like a cork. And that is how the
king set about to ruin the poor beggar-man.

Well, the chest floated on and on for three days, and then at last it
came to the shore of a country far away. There the waves caught it up,
and flung it so hard upon the rocks of the sea-beach that the chest was
burst open by the blow, and the beggar crawled out with eyes as big as
saucers and face as white as dough. After he had sat for a while, and
when his wits came back to him and he had gathered strength enough, he
stood up and looked around to see where Fate had cast him; and far away
on the hill-sides he saw the walls and the roofs and the towers of the
great town, shining in the sunlight as white as snow.

“Well,” said he, “here is something to be thankful for, at least,” and
so saying and shaking the stiffness out of his knees and elbows, he
started off for the white walls and the red roofs in the distance.

At last he reached the great gate, and through it he could see the stony
streets and multitudes of people coming and going.

But it was not for him to enter that gate. Out popped two soldiers with
great battle-axes in their hands and looking as fierce as dragons. “Are
you a stranger in this town?” said one in a great, gruff voice.

“Yes,” said the beggar, “I am.”

“And where are you going?”

“I am going into the town.”

“No, you are not.”

“Why not?”

“Because no stranger enters here. Yonder is the pathway. You must take
that if you would enter the town.”

“Very well,” said the beggar, “I would just as lief go into the town
that way as another.”

So off he marched without another word. On and on he went along the
narrow pathway until at last he came to a little gate of polished brass.
Over the gate were written these words, in great letters as red as
blood:

“Who Enters here Shall Surely Die.”

Many and many a man besides the beggar had travelled that path and
looked up at those letters, and when he had read them had turned and
gone away again. But the beggar neither turned nor went away; because
why, he could neither read nor write a word, and so the blood-red
letters had no fear for him. Up he marched to the brazen gate, as boldly
as though it had been a kitchen door, and rap! tap! tap! he knocked upon
it. He waited awhile, but nobody came. Rap! tap! tap! he knocked again;
and then, after a little while, for the third time--Rap! tap! tap! Then
instantly the gate swung open and he entered. So soon as he had crossed
the threshold it was banged to behind him again, just as the garden gate
had been when the king had first sent for him. He found himself in a
long, dark entry, and at the end of it another door, and over it the
same words, written in blood-red letters:

“Beware! Beware! Who Enters here Shall Surely Die!”

“Well,” said the beggar, “this is the hardest town for a body to come
into that I ever saw.” And then he opened the second door and passed
through.

It was fit to deafen a body! Such a shout the beggar’s ears had never
heard before; such a sight the beggar’s eyes had never beheld, for
there, before him, was a great splendid hall of marble as white as snow.
All along the hall stood scores of lords and ladies in silks and satins,
and with jewels on their necks and arms fit to dazzle a body’s eyes.
Right up the middle of the hall stretched a carpet of blue velvet, and
at the farther end, on a throne of gold, sat a lady as beautiful as the
sun and moon and all the stars.

“Welcome! welcome!” they all shouted, until the beggar was nearly
deafened by the noise they all made, and the lady herself stood up and
smiled upon him.

Then there came three young men, and led the beggar up the carpet of
velvet to the throne of gold.

“Welcome, my hero!” said the beautiful lady; “and have you, then, come
at last?”

“Yes,” said the beggar, “I have.”

“Long have I waited for you,” said the lady; “long have I waited for the
hero who would dare without fear to come through the two gates of death
to marry me and to rule as king over this country, and now at last you
are here.”

“Yes,” said the beggar, “I am.”

Meanwhile, while all these things were happening, the king of that other
country had painted out the words his father had written on the walls,
and had had these words painted in in their stead:

“All Things are as Man does.”

For a while he was very well satisfied with them, until, a week after,
he was bidden to the wedding of the Queen of the Golden Mountains; for
when he came there who should the bridegroom be but the beggar whom he
had set adrift in the wooden box a week or so before.

The bridegroom winked at him, but said never a word, good or ill, for he
was willing to let all that had happened be past and gone. But the king
saw how matters stood as clear as daylight, and when he got back home
again he had the new words that stood on the walls of the room painted
out, and had the old ones painted in in bigger letters than ever:

“All Things are as Fate wills.”


All the good people who were gathered around the table of the Sign of
Mother Goose sat thinking for a while over the story. As for Boots, he
buried his face in the quart pot and took a long, long pull at the ale.

“Methinks,” said the Soldier who cheated the Devil, presently breaking
silence--“methinks there be very few of the women folk who do their
share of this story-telling. So far we have had but one, and that is
Lady Cinderella. I see another one present, and I drink to her health.”

He winked his eye at Patient Grizzle, beckoning towards her with his
quart pot, and took a long and hearty pull. Then he banged his mug down
upon the table. “Fetch me another glass, lass,” said he to little Brown
Betty. “Meantime, fair lady”--this he said to Patient Grizzle--“will you
not entertain us with some story of your own?”

“I know not,” said Patient Grizzle, “that I can tell you any story worth
your hearing.”

“Aye, aye, but you can,” said the Soldier who cheated the Devil; “and,
moreover, anything coming from betwixt such red lips and such white
teeth will be worth the listening to.”

Patient Grizzle smiled, and the brave little Tailor, and the Lad who
fiddled for the Jew, and Hans and Bidpai and Boots nodded approval.

“Aye,” said Ali Baba, “it is true enough that there have been but few
of the women folk who have had their say, and methinks that it is very
strange and unaccountable, for nearly always they have plenty to speak
in their own behalf.”

All who sat there in Twilight Land laughed, and even Patient Grizzle
smiled.

“Very well,” said Patient Grizzle, “if you will have it, I will tell you
a story. It is about a fisherman who was married and had a wife of his
own, and who made her carry all the load of everything that happened to
him. For he, like most men I wot of, had found out--”




Where to Lay the Blame.

Many and many a man has come to trouble--so he will say--by following
his wife’s advice. This is how it was with a man of whom I shall tell
you.

There was once upon a time a fisherman who had fished all day long and
had caught not so much as a sprat. So at night there he sat by the fire,
rubbing his knees and warming his shins, and waiting for supper that his
wife was cooking for him, and his hunger was as sharp as vinegar, and
his temper hot enough to fry fat.

While he sat there grumbling and growling and trying to make himself
comfortable and warm, there suddenly came a knock at the door. The good
woman opened it, and there stood an old man, clad all in red from head
to foot, and with a snowy beard at his chin as white as winter snow.

The fisherman’s wife stood gaping and staring at the strange figure,
but the old man in red walked straight into the hut. “Bring your nets,
fisherman,” said he, “and come with me. There is something that I want
you to catch for me, and if I have luck I will pay you for your fishing
as never fisherman was paid before.”

“Not I,” said the fisherman, “I go out no more this night. I have been
fishing all day long until my back is nearly broken, and have caught
nothing, and now I am not such a fool as to go out and leave a warm fire
and a good supper at your bidding.”

But the fisherman’s wife had listened to what the old man had said about
paying for the job, and she was of a different mind from her husband.
“Come,” said she, “the old man promises to pay you well. This is not a
chance to be lost, I can tell you, and my advice to you is that you go.”

The fisherman shook his head. No, he would not go; he had said he would
not, and he would not. But the wife only smiled and said again, “My
advice to you is that you go.”

The fisherman grumbled and grumbled, and swore that he would not go. The
wife said nothing but one thing. She did not argue; she did not lose her
temper; she only said to everything that he said, “My advice to you is
that you go.”

At last the fisherman’s anger boiled over. “Very well,” said he,
spitting his words at her; “if you will drive me out into the night, I
suppose I will have to go.” And then he spoke the words that so many men
say: “Many a man has come to trouble by following his wife’s advice.”

Then down he took his fur cap and up he took his nets, and off he and
the old man marched through the moonlight, their shadows bobbing along
like black spiders behind them.

Well, on they went, out from the town and across the fields and through
the woods, until at last they came to a dreary, lonesome desert, where
nothing was to be seen but gray rocks and weeds and thistles.

“Well,” said the fisherman, “I have fished, man and boy, for forty-seven
years, but never did I see as unlikely a place to catch anything as
this.”

But the old man said never a word. First of all he drew a great circle
with strange figures, marking it with his finger upon the ground. Then
out from under his red gown he brought a tinder-box and steel, and a
little silver casket covered all over with strange figures of serpents
and dragons and what not. He brought some sticks of spice-wood from his
pouch, and then he struck a light and made a fire. Out of the box he
took a gray powder, which he flung upon the little blaze.

Puff! flash! A vivid flame went up into the moonlight, and then a dense
smoke as black as ink, which spread out wider and wider, far and near,
till all below was darker than the darkest midnight. Then the old
man began to utter strange spells and words. Presently there began a
rumbling that sounded louder and louder and nearer and nearer, until it
roared and bellowed like thunder. The earth rocked and swayed, and the
poor fisherman shook and trembled with fear till his teeth clattered in
his head.

Then suddenly the roaring and bellowing ceased, and all was as still as
death, though the darkness was as thick and black as ever.

“Now,” said the old magician--for such he was--“now we are about to take
a journey such as no one ever travelled before. Heed well what I tell
you. Speak not a single word, for if you do, misfortune will be sure to
happen.”

“Ain’t I to say anything?” said the fisherman.

“No.”

“Not even boo’ to a goose?”

“No.”

“Well, that is pretty hard upon a man who likes to say his say,” said
the fisherman.

“And moreover,” said the old man, “I must blindfold you as well.”

Thereupon he took from his pocket a handkerchief, and made ready to tie
it about the fisherman’s eyes.

“And ain’t I to see anything at all?” said the fisherman.

“No.”

“Not even so much as a single feather?”

“No.”

“Well, then,” said the fisherman, “I wish I’d not come.”

But the old man tied the handkerchief tightly around his eyes, and then
he was as blind as a bat.

“Now,” said the old man, “throw your leg over what you feel and hold
fast.”

The fisherman reached down his hand, and there felt the back of
something rough and hairy. He flung his leg over it, and whisk! whizz!
off he shot through the air like a sky-rocket. Nothing was left for him
to do but grip tightly with hands and feet and to hold fast. On they
went, and on they went, until, after a great while, whatever it was
that was carrying him lit upon the ground, and there the fisherman found
himself standing, for that which had brought him had gone.

The old man whipped the handkerchief off his eyes, and there the
fisherman found himself on the shores of the sea, where there was
nothing to be seen but water upon one side and rocks and naked sand upon
the other.

“This is the place for you to cast your nets,” said the old magician;
“for if we catch nothing here we catch nothing at all.”

The fisherman unrolled his nets and cast them and dragged them, and then
cast them and dragged them again, but neither time caught so much as
a herring. But the third time that he cast he found that he had caught
something that weighed as heavy as lead. He pulled and pulled, until
by-and-by he dragged the load ashore, and what should it be but a great
chest of wood, blackened by the sea-water, and covered with shells and
green moss.

That was the very thing that the magician had come to fish for.

From his pouch the old man took a little golden key, which he fitted
into a key-hole in the side of the chest. He threw back the lid; the
fisherman looked within, and there was the prettiest little palace that
man’s eye ever beheld, all made of mother-of-pearl and silver-frosted as
white as snow. The old magician lifted the little palace out of the box
and set it upon the ground.

Then, lo and behold! a marvellous thing happened; for the palace
instantly began to grow for all the world like a soap-bubble, until it
stood in the moonlight gleaming and glistening like snow, the windows
bright with the lights of a thousand wax tapers, and the sound of music
and voices and laughter coming from within.

Hardly could the fisherman catch his breath from one strange thing
when another happened. The old magician took off his clothes and his
face--yes, his face--for all the world as though it had been a mask, and
there stood as handsome and noble a young man as ever the light looked
on. Then, beckoning to the fisherman, dumb with wonder, he led the way
up the great flight of marble steps to the palace door. As he came
the door swung open with a blaze of light, and there stood hundreds of
noblemen, all clad in silks and satins and velvets, who, when they
saw the magician, bowed low before him, as though he had been a king.
Leading the way, they brought the two through halls and chambers and
room after room, each more magnificent than the other, until they came
to one that surpassed a hundredfold any of the others.

At the farther end was a golden throne, and upon it sat a lady more
lovely and beautiful than a dream, her eyes as bright as diamonds, her
cheeks like rose leaves, and her hair like spun gold. She came half-way
down the steps of the throne to welcome the magician, and when the two
met they kissed one another before all those who were looking on. Then
she brought him to the throne and seated him beside her, and there they
talked for a long time very earnestly.

Nobody said a word to the fisherman, who stood staring about him like an
owl. “I wonder,” said he to himself at last, “if they will give a body a
bite to eat by-and-by?” for, to tell the truth, the good supper that
he had come away from at home had left a sharp hunger gnawing at his
insides, and he longed for something good and warm to fill the empty
place. But time passed, and not so much as a crust of bread was brought
to stay his stomach.

By-and-by the clock struck twelve, and then the two who sat upon the
throne arose. The beautiful lady took the magician by the hand, and,
turning to those who stood around, said, in a loud voice, “Behold him
who alone is worthy to possess the jewel of jewels! Unto him do I give
it, and with it all power of powers!” Thereon she opened a golden casket
that stood beside her, and brought thence a little crystal ball, about
as big as a pigeon’s egg, in which was something that glistened like a
spark of fire. The magician took the crystal ball and thrust it into his
bosom; but what it was the fisherman could not guess, and if you do not
know I shall not tell you.

Then for the first time the beautiful lady seemed to notice the
fisherman. She beckoned him, and when he stood beside her two men came
carrying a chest. The chief treasurer opened it, and it was full of bags
of gold money. “How will you have it?” said the beautiful lady.

“Have what?” said the fisherman.

“Have the pay for your labor?” said the beautiful lady.

“I will,” said the fisherman, promptly, “take it in my hat.”

“So be it,” said the beautiful lady. She waved her hand, and the chief
treasurer took a bag from the chest, untied it, and emptied a cataract
of gold into the fur cap. The fisherman had never seen so much wealth in
all his life before, and he stood like a man turned to stone.

“Is this all mine?” said the fisherman.

“It is,” said the beautiful lady.

“Then God bless your pretty eyes,” said the fisherman.

Then the magician kissed the beautiful lady, and, beckoning to the
fisherman, left the throne-room the same way that they had come. The
noblemen, in silks and satins and velvets, marched ahead, and back they
went through the other apartments, until at last they came to the door.

Out they stepped, and then what do you suppose happened?

If the wonderful palace had grown like a bubble, like a bubble it
vanished. There the two stood on the sea-shore, with nothing to be seen
but rocks and sand and water, and the starry sky overhead.

The fisherman shook his cap of gold, and it jingled and tinkled, and was
as heavy as lead. If it was not all a dream, he was rich for life. “But
anyhow,” said he, “they might have given a body a bite to eat.”

The magician put on his red clothes and his face again, making himself
as hoary and as old as before. He took out his flint and steel, and
his sticks of spice-wood and his gray powder, and made a great fire and
smoke just as he had done before. Then again he tied his handkerchief
over the fisherman’s eyes. “Remember,” said he, “what I told you when we
started upon our journey. Keep your mouth tight shut, for if you utter
so much as a single word you are a lost man. Now throw your leg over
what you feel and hold fast.”

The fisherman had his net over one arm and his cap of gold in the other
hand; nevertheless, there he felt the same hairy thing he had felt
before. He flung his leg over it, and away he was gone through the air
like a sky-rocket.

Now, he had grown somewhat used to strange things by this time, so he
began to think that he would like to see what sort of a creature it was
upon which he was riding thus through the sky. So he contrived, in spite
of his net and cap, to push up the handkerchief from over one eye. Out
he peeped, and then he saw as clear as day what the strange steed was.

He was riding upon a he-goat as black as night, and in front of him
was the magician riding upon just such another, his great red robe
fluttering out behind him in the moonlight like huge red wings.

“Great herring and little fishes!” roared the fisherman; “it is a
billy-goat!”

Instantly goats, old man, and all were gone like a flash. Down fell the
fisherman through the empty sky, whirling over and over and around and
around like a frog. He held tightly to his net, but away flew his fur
cap, the golden money falling in a shower like sparks of yellow light.
Down he fell and down he fell, until his head spun like a top.

By good-luck his house was just below, with its thatch of soft
rushes. Into the very middle of it he tumbled, and right through the
thatch--bump!--into the room below.

The good wife was in bed, snoring away for dear life; but such a noise
as the fisherman made coming into the house was enough to wake the dead.
Up she jumped, and there she sat, staring and winking with sleep, and
with her brains as addled as a duck’s egg in a thunder-storm.

“There!” said the fisherman, as he gathered himself up and rubbed his
shoulder, “that is what comes of following a woman’s advice!”


All the good folk clapped their hands, not so much because of the story
itself, but because it was a woman who told it.

“Aye, aye,” said the brave little Tailor, “there is truth in what you
tell, fair lady, and I like very well the way in which you have told
it.”

“Whose turn is it next?” said Doctor Faustus, lighting a fresh pipe of
tobacco.

“Tis the turn of yonder old gentleman,” said the Soldier who cheated
the Devil, and he pointed with the stem of his pipe to the Fisherman who
unbottled the Genie that King Solomon had corked up and thrown into the
sea. “Every one else hath told a story, and now it is his turn.”

“I will not deny, my friend, that what you say is true, and that it is
my turn,” said the Fisherman. “Nor will I deny that I have already a
story in my mind. It is,” said he, “about a certain prince, and of how
he went through many and one adventures, and at last discovered that
which is--”




The Salt of Life.

Once upon a time there was a king who had three sons, and by the time
that the youngest prince had down upon his chin the king had grown so
old that the cares of the kingdom began to rest over-heavily upon his
shoulders. So he called his chief councillor and told him that he was of
a mind to let the princes reign in his stead. To the son who loved him
the best he would give the largest part of his kingdom, to the son who
loved him the next best the next part, and to the son who loved him the
least the least part. The old councillor was very wise and shook his
head, but the king’s mind had long been settled as to what he was about
to do. So he called the princes to him one by one and asked each as to
how much he loved him.

“I love you as a mountain of gold,” said the oldest prince, and the king
was very pleased that his son should give him such love.

“I love you as a mountain of silver,” said the second prince, and the
king was pleased with that also.

But when the youngest prince was called, he did not answer at first, but
thought and thought. At last he looked up. “I love you,” said he, “as I
love salt.”

When the king heard what his youngest son said he was filled with anger.
“What!” he cried, “do you love me no better than salt--a stuff that is
the most bitter of all things to the taste, and the cheapest and the
commonest of all things in the world? Away with you, and never let me
see your face again! Henceforth you are no son of mine.”

The prince would have spoken, but the king would not allow him, and bade
his guards thrust the young man forth from the room.

Now the queen loved the youngest prince the best of all her sons, and
when she heard how the king was about to drive him forth into the wide
world to shift for himself, she wept and wept. “Ah, my son!” said she to
him, “it is little or nothing that I have to give you. Nevertheless, I
have one precious thing. Here is a ring; take it and wear it always,
for so long as you have it upon your finger no magic can have power over
you.”

Thus it was that the youngest prince set forth into the wide world with
little or nothing but a ring upon his finger.

For seven days he travelled on, and knew not where he was going or
whither his footsteps led. At the end of that time he came to the gates
of a town. The prince entered the gates, and found himself in a city
the like of which he had never seen in his life before for grandeur and
magnificence--beautiful palaces and gardens, stores and bazaars crowded
with rich stuffs of satin and silk and wrought silver and gold of
cunningest workmanship; for the land to which he had come was the
richest in all of the world. All that day he wandered up and down, and
thought nothing of weariness and hunger for wonder of all that he
saw. But at last evening drew down, and he began to bethink himself of
somewhere to lodge during the night.

Just then he came to a bridge, over the wall of which leaned an old man
with a long white beard, looking down into the water. He was dressed
richly but soberly, and every now and then he sighed and groaned, and as
the prince drew near he saw the tears falling--drip, drip--from the old
man’s eyes.

The prince had a kind heart, and could not bear to see one in distress;
so he spoke to the old man, and asked him his trouble.

“Ah, me!” said the other, “only yesterday I had a son, tall and handsome
like yourself. But the queen took him to sup with her, and I am left all
alone in my old age, like a tree stripped of leaves and fruit.”

“But surely,” said the prince, “it can be no such sad matter to sup with
a queen. That is an honor that most men covet.”

“Ah!” said the old man, “you are a stranger in this place, or else you
would know that no youth so chosen to sup with the queen ever returns to
his home again.”

“Yes,” said the prince, “I am a stranger and have only come hither this
day, and so do not understand these things. Even when I found you I was
about to ask the way to some inn where folk of good condition lodge.”

“Then come home with me to-night,” said the old man. “I live all alone,
and I will tell you the trouble that lies upon this country.” Thereupon,
taking the prince by the arm, he led him across the bridge and to
another quarter of the town where he dwelt. He bade the servants prepare
a fine supper, and he and the prince sat down to the table together.
After they had made an end of eating and drinking, the old man told the
prince all concerning those things of which he had spoken, and thus it
was:

“When the king of this land died he left behind him three daughters--the
most beautiful princesses in all of the world.

“Folk hardly dared speak of the eldest of them, but whisperings said
that she was a sorceress, and that strange and gruesome things were done
by her. The second princess was also a witch, though it was not said
that she was evil, like the other. As for the youngest of the three, she
was as beautiful as the morning and as gentle as a dove. When she was
born a golden thread was about her neck, and it was foretold of her that
she was to be the queen of that land.

“But not long after the old king died the youngest princess vanished--no
one could tell whither, and no one dared to ask--and the eldest princess
had herself crowned as queen, and no one dared gainsay her. For a while
everything went well enough, but by-and-by evil days came upon the land.
Once every seven days the queen would bid some youth, young and strong,
to sup with her, and from that time no one ever heard of him again, and
no one dared ask what had become of him. At first it was the great
folk at the queen’s palace--officers and courtiers--who suffered; but
by-and-by the sons of the merchants and the chief men of the city began
to be taken. One time,” said the old man, “I myself had three sons--as
noble young men as could be found in the wide world. One day the chief
of the queen’s officers came to my house and asked me concerning how
many sons I had. I was forced to tell him, and in a little while they
were taken one by one to the queen’s palace, and I never saw them again.

“But misfortune, like death, comes upon the young as well as the old.
You yourself have had trouble, or else I am mistaken. Tell me what
lies upon your heart, my son, for the talking of it makes the burthen
lighter.”

The prince did as the old man bade him, and told all of his story; and
so they sat talking and talking until far into the night, and the old
man grew fonder and fonder of the prince the more he saw of him. So the
end of the matter was that he asked the prince to live with him as his
son, seeing that the young man had now no father and he no children, and
the prince consented gladly enough.

So the two lived together like father and son, and the good old man
began to take some joy in life once more.

But one day who should come riding up to the door but the chief of the
queen’s officers.

“How is this?” said he to the old man, when he saw the prince. “Did you
not tell me that you had but three sons, and is this not a fourth?”

It was of no use for the old man to tell the officer that the youth was
not his son, but was a prince who had come to visit that country. The
officer drew forth his tablets and wrote something upon them, and then
went his way, leaving the old man sighing and groaning. “Ah, me!” said
he, “my heart sadly forebodes trouble.”

Sure enough, before three days had passed a bidding came to the prince
to make ready to sup with the queen that night.

When evening drew near a troop of horsemen came, bringing a white horse
with a saddle and bridle of gold studded with precious stones, to take
the prince to the queen’s palace.

As soon as they had brought him thither they led the prince to a room
where was a golden table spread with a snow-white cloth and set with
dishes of gold. At the end of the table the queen sat waiting for him,
and her face was hidden by a veil of silver gauze. She raised the veil
and looked at the prince, and when he saw her face he stood as one
wonder-struck, for not only was she so beautiful, but she set a spell
upon him with the evil charm of her eyes. No one sat at the table but
the queen and the prince, and a score of young pages served them, and
sweet music sounded from a curtained gallery.

At last came midnight, and suddenly a great gong sounded from the
court-yard outside. Then in an instant the music was stopped, the pages
that served them hurried from the room, and presently all was as still
as death.

Then, when all were gone, the queen arose and beckoned the prince, and
he had no choice but to arise also and follow whither she led. She took
him through the palace, where all was as still as the grave, and so came
out by a postern door into a garden. Beside the postern a torch burned
in a bracket. The queen took it down, and then led the prince up a path
and under the silent trees until they came to a great wall of rough
stone. She pressed her hand upon one of the great stones, and it opened
like a door, and there was a flight of steps that led downward. The
queen descended these steps, and the prince followed closely behind her.
At the bottom was a long passage-way, and at the farther end the prince
saw what looked like a bright spark of light, as though the sun were
shining. She thrust the torch into another bracket in the wall of the
passage, and then led the way towards the light. It grew larger and
larger as they went forward, until at last they came out at the farther
end, and there the prince found himself standing in the sunlight and
not far from the seashore. The queen led the way towards the shore, when
suddenly a great number of black dogs came running towards them, barking
and snapping, and showing their teeth as though they would tear the two
in pieces. But the queen drew from her bosom a whip with a steel-pointed
lash, and as the dogs came springing towards them she laid about her
right and left, till the skin flew and the blood ran, and the dogs
leaped away howling and yelping.

At the edge of the water was a great stone mill, and the queen pointed
towards it and bade the prince turn it. Strong as he was, it was as much
as he could do to work it; but grind it he did, though the sweat ran
down his face in streams. By-and-by a speck appeared far away upon the
water; and as the prince ground and ground at the mill the speck grew
larger and larger. It was something upon the water, and it came nearer
and nearer as swiftly as the wind. At last it came close enough for him
to see that it was a little boat all of brass. By-and-by the boat struck
upon the beach, and as soon as it did so the queen entered it, bidding
the prince do the same.

No sooner were they seated than away the boat went, still as swiftly as
the wind. On it flew and on it flew, until at last they came to another
shore, the like of which the prince had never seen in his life before.
Down to the edge of the water ran a garden--but such a garden! The
leaves of the trees were all of silver and the fruit of gold, and
instead of flowers were precious stones--white, red, yellow, blue, and
green--that flashed like sparks of sunlight as the breeze moved them
this way and that way. Beyond the silver trees, with their golden fruit,
was a great palace as white as snow, and so bright that one had to shut
one’s eyes as one looked upon it.

The boat ran up on the beach close to just such a stone mill as the
prince had seen upon the other side of the water, and then he and
the queen stepped ashore. As soon as they had done so the brazen boat
floated swiftly away, and in a little while was gone.

“Here our journey ends,” said the queen. “Is it not a wonderful land,
and well worth the seeing? Look at all these jewels and this gold, as
plenty as fruits and flowers at home. You may take what you please; but
while you are gathering them I have another matter after which I must
look. Wait for me here, and by-and-by I will be back again.”

So saying, she turned and left the prince, going towards the castle back
of the trees.

But the prince was a prince, and not a common man; he cared nothing for
gold and jewels. What he did care for was to see where the queen went,
and why she had brought him to this strange land. So, as soon as she had
fairly gone, he followed after.

He went along under the gold and silver trees, in the direction she had
taken, until at last he came to a tall flight of steps that led up to
the doorway of the snow-white palace. The door stood open, and into it
the prince went. He saw not a soul, but he heard a noise as of blows and
the sound as of some one weeping. He followed the sound, until by-and-by
he came to a great vaulted room in the very centre of the palace. A
curtain hung at the doorway. The prince lifted it and peeped within, and
this was what he saw:

In the middle of the room was a marble basin of water as clear as
crystal, and around the sides of the basin were these words, written in
letters of gold:

“Whatsoever is False, that I make True.”

Beside the fountain upon a marble stand stood a statue of a beautiful
woman made of alabaster, and around the neck of the statue was a thread
of gold. The queen stood beside the statue, and beat and beat it with
her steel-tipped whip. And all the while she lashed it the statue sighed
and groaned like a living being, and the tears ran down its stone cheeks
as though it were a suffering Christian. By-and-by the queen rested for
a moment, and said, panting, “Will you give me the thread of gold?” and
the statue answered “No.” Whereupon she fell to raining blows upon it as
she had done before.

So she continued, now beating the statue and now asking it whether it
would give her the thread of gold, to which the statue always answered
“No,” and all the while the prince stood gazing and wondering. By-and-by
the queen wearied of what she was doing, and thrust the steel-tipped
lash back into her bosom again, upon which the prince, seeing that
she was done, hurried back to the garden where she had left him and
pretended to be gathering the golden fruit and jewel flowers.

The queen said nothing to him good or bad, except to command him to
grind at the great stone mill as he had done on the other side of the
water. Thereupon the prince did as she bade, and presently the brazen
boat came skimming over the water more swiftly than the wind. Again the
queen and the prince entered it, and again it carried them to the other
side whence they had come.

No sooner had the queen set foot upon the shore than she stopped and
gathered up a handful of sand. Then, turning as quick as lightning, she
flung it into the prince’s face. “Be a black dog,” she cried in a loud
voice, “and join your comrades!”

And now it was that the ring that the prince’s mother had given him
stood him in good stead. But for it he would have become a black dog
like those others, for thus it had happened to all before him who had
ferried the witch queen over the water. So she expected to see him
run away yelping, as those others had done; but the prince remained a
prince, and stood looking her in the face.

When the queen saw that her magic had failed her she grew as pale as
death, and fell to trembling in every limb. She turned and hastened
quickly away, and the prince followed her wondering, for he neither knew
the mischief she had intended doing him, nor how his ring had saved him
from the fate of those others.

So they came back up the stairs and out through the stone wall into
the palace garden. The queen pressed her hand against the stone and it
turned back into its place again. Then, beckoning to the prince, she
hurried away down the garden. Before he followed he picked up a coal
that lay near by, and put a cross upon the stone; then he hurried after
her, and so came to the palace once more.

By this time the cocks were crowing, and the dawn of day was just
beginning to show over the roof-tops and the chimney-stacks of the town.

As for the queen, she had regained her composure, and, bidding the
prince wait for her a moment, she hastened to her chamber. There she
opened her book of magic, and in it she soon found who the prince was
and how the ring had saved him.

When she had learned all that she wanted to know she put on a smiling
face and came back to him. “Ah, prince,” said she, “I well know who you
are, for your coming to my country is not secret to me. I have shown
you strange things to-night. I will unfold all the wonder to you another
time. Will you not come back and sup with me again?”

“Yes,” said the prince, “I will come whensoever you bid me;” for he was
curious to know the secret of the statue and the strange things he had
seen.

“And will you not give me a pledge of your coming?” said the queen,
still smiling.

“What pledge shall I give you,” said the prince.

“Give me the ring that is upon your finger,” said the queen; and she
smiled so bewitchingly that the prince could not have refused her had he
desired to do so.

Alas for him! He thought no evil, but, without a word, drew off the ring
and gave it to the queen, and she slipped it upon her finger.

“O fool!” she cried, laughing a wicked laugh, “O fool! to give away that
in which your safety lay!” As she spoke she dipped her fingers into a
basin of water that stood near by and dashed the drops into the prince’s
face. “Be a raven,” she cried, “and a raven remain!”

In an instant the prince was a prince no longer, but a coal-black raven.
The queen snatched up a sword that lay near by and struck at him to kill
him. But the raven-prince leaped aside and the blow missed its aim.

By good luck a window stood open, and before the queen could strike
again he spread his wings and flew out of the open casement and over the
house-tops and was gone.

On he flew and on he flew until he came to the old man’s house, and so
to the room where his foster-father himself was sitting. He lit upon the
ground at the old man’s feet and tried to tell him what had befallen,
but all that he could say was “Croak! croak!”

“What brings this bird of ill omen?” said the old man, and he drew his
sword to kill it. He raised his hand to strike, but the raven did not
try to fly away as he had expected, but bowed his neck to receive the
stroke. Then the old man saw that the tears were running down from the
raven’s eyes, and he held his hand. “What strange thing is this?” he
said. “Surely nothing but the living soul weeps; and how, then, can this
bird shed tears?” So he took the raven up and looked into his eyes, and
in them he saw the prince’s soul. “Alas!” he cried, “my heart misgives
me that something strange has happened. Tell me, is this not my
foster-son, the prince?”

The raven answered “Croak!” and nothing else; but the good old man
understood it all, and the tears ran down his cheeks and trickled over
his beard. “Whether man or raven, you shall still be my son,” said he,
and he held the raven close in his arms and caressed it.

He had a golden cage made for the bird, and every day he would walk with
it in the garden, talking to it as a father talks to his son.

One day when they were thus in the garden together a strange lady came
towards them down the pathway. Over her had and face was drawn a thick
veil, so that the two could not tell who she was. When she came close to
them she raised the veil, and the raven-prince saw that her face was the
living likeness of the queen’s; and yet there was something in it that
was different. It was the second sister of the queen, and the old man
knew her and bowed before her.

“Listen,” said she. “I know what the raven is, and that it is the
prince, whom the queen has bewitched. I also know nearly as much of
magic as she, and it is that alone that has saved me so long from ill.
But danger hangs close over me; the queen only waits for the chance to
bewitch me; and some day she will overpower me, for she is stronger
than I. With the prince’s aid I can overcome her and make myself forever
safe, and it is this that has brought me here to-day. My magic is
powerful enough to change the prince back into his true shape again, and
I will do so if he will aid me in what follows, and this is it: I will
conjure the queen, and by-and-by a great eagle will come flying, and its
plumage will be as black as night. Then I myself will become an eagle,
with black-and-white plumage, and we two will fight in the air. After a
while we will both fall to the ground, and then the prince must cut off
the head of the black eagle with a knife I shall give him. Will you do
this?” said she, turning to the raven, “if I transform you to your true
shape?”

The raven bowed his head and said “Croak!” And the sister of the queen
knew that he meant yes.

Therewith she drew a great, long keen knife from her bosom, and thrust
it into the ground. “It is with this knife of magic,” said she, “that
you must cut off the black eagle’s head.” Then the witch-princess
gathered up some sand in her hand, and flung it into the raven’s face.
“Resume,” cried she, “your own shape!” And in an instant the prince was
himself again. The next thing the sister of the queen did was to draw a
circle upon the ground around the prince, the old man, and herself. On
the circle she marked strange figures here and there. Then, all three
standing close together, she began her conjurations, uttering strange
words--now under her breath, and now clear and loud.

Presently the sky darkened, and it began to thunder and rumble. Darker
it grew and darker, and the thunder crashed and roared. The earth
trembled under their feet, and the trees swayed hither and thither as
though tossed by a tempest. Then suddenly the uproar ceased and all grew
as still as death, the clouds rolled away, and in a moment the sun shone
out once more, and all was calm and serene as it had been before. But
still the princess muttered her conjurations, and as the prince and the
old man looked they beheld a speck that grew larger and larger, until
they saw that it was an eagle as black as night that was coming swiftly
flying through the sky. Then the queen’s sister also saw it and ceased
from her spells. She drew a little cap of feathers from her bosom with
trembling hands. “Remember,” said she to the prince; and, so saying,
clapped the feather cap upon her head. In an instant she herself became
an eagle--pied, black and white--and, spreading her wings, leaped into
the air.

For a while the two eagles circled around and around; but at last they
dashed against one another, and, grappling with their talons, tumbled
over and over until they struck the ground close to the two who stood
looking.

Then the prince snatched the knife from the ground and ran to where they
lay struggling. “Which was I to kill?” said he to the old man.

“Are they not birds of a feather?” cried the foster-father. “Kill them
both, for then only shall we all be safe.”

The prince needed no second telling to see the wisdom of what the old
man said. In an instant he struck off the heads of both the eagles, and
thus put an end to both sorceresses, the lesser as well as the greater.
They buried both of the eagles in the garden without telling any one of
what had happened. So soon as that was done the old man bade the prince
tell him all that had befallen him, and the prince did so.

“Aye! aye!” said the old man, “I see it all as clear as day. The black
dogs are the young men who have supped with the queen; the statue is the
good princess; and the basin of water is the water of life, which has
the power of taking away magic. Come; let us make haste to bring help to
all those unfortunates who have been lying under the queen’s spells.”

The prince needed no urging to do that. They hurried to the palace; they
crossed the garden to the stone wall. There they found the stone upon
which the prince had set the black cross. He pressed his hand upon it,
and it opened to him like a door. They descended the steps, and went
through the passageway, until they came out upon the sea-shore. The
black dogs came leaping towards them; but this time it was to fawn upon
them, and to lick their hands and faces.

The prince turned the great stone mill till the brazen boat came flying
towards the shore. They entered it, and so crossed the water and came to
the other side. They did not tarry in the garden, but went straight to
the snow-white palace and to the great vaulted chamber where was the
statue. “Yes,” said the old man, “it is the youngest princess, sure
enough.”

The prince said nothing, but he dipped up some of the water in his palm
and dashed it upon the statue. “If you are the princess, take your true
shape again,” said he. Before the words had left his lips the statue
became flesh and blood, and the princess stepped down from where
she stood, and the prince thought that he had never seen any one so
beautiful as she. “You have brought me back to life,” said she, “and
whatever I shall have shall be yours as well as mine.”

Then they all set their faces homeward again, and the prince took with
him a cupful of the water of life.

When they reached the farther shore the black dogs came running to meet
them. The prince sprinkled the water he carried upon them, and as soon
as it touched them that instant they were black dogs no longer, but the
tall, noble young men that the sorceress queen had bewitched. There, as
the old man had hoped, he found his own three sons, and kissed them with
the tears running down his face.

But when the people of that land learned that their youngest princess,
and the one whom they loved, had come back again, and that the two
sorceresses would trouble them no longer, they shouted and shouted for
joy. All the town was hung with flags and illuminated, the fountains ran
with wine, and nothing was heard but sounds of rejoicing. In the midst
of it all the prince married the princess, and so became the king of
that country.

And now to go back again to the beginning.

After the youngest prince had been driven away from home, and the old
king had divided the kingdom betwixt the other two, things went for a
while smoothly and joyfully. But by little and little the king was put
to one side until he became as nothing in his own land. At last hot
words passed between the father and the two sons, and the end of the
matter was that the king was driven from the land to shift for himself.

Now, after the youngest prince had married and had become king of that
other land, he bethought himself of his father and his mother, and
longed to see them again. So he set forth and travelled towards his old
home. In his journeying he came to a lonely house at the edge of a great
forest, and there night came upon him. He sent one of the many of those
who rode with him to ask whether he could not find lodging there for
the time, and who should answer the summons but the king, his father,
dressed in the coarse clothing of a forester. The old king did not know
his own son in the kingly young king who sat upon his snow-white horse.
He bade the visitor to enter, and he and the old queen served their son
and bowed before him.

The next morning the young king rode back to his own land, and then sent
attendants with horses and splendid clothes, and bade them bring his
father and mother to his own home.

He had a noble feast set for them, with everything befitting the
entertainment of a king, but he ordered that not a grain of salt should
season it.

So the father and the mother sat down to the feast with their son and
his queen, but all the time they did not know him. The old king tasted
the food and tasted the food, but he could not eat of it.

“Do you not feel hungry?” said the young king.

“Alas,” said his father, “I crave your majesty’s pardon, but there is no
salt in the food.”

“And so is life lacking of savor without love,” said the young king;
“and yet because I loved you as salt you disowned me and cast me out
into the world.”

Therewith he could contain himself no longer, but with the tears running
down his cheeks kissed his father and his mother; and they knew him, and
kissed him again.

Afterwards the young king went with a great army into the country of
his elder brothers, and, overcoming them, set his father upon his throne
again. If ever the two got back their crowns you may be sure that they
wore them more modestly than they did the first time.


So the Fisherman who had one time unbottled the Genie whom Solomon the
Wise had stoppered up concluded his story, and all of the good folk who
were there began clapping their shadowy hands.

“Aye, aye,” said old Bidpai, “there is much truth in what you say, for
it is verily so that that which men call--love--is--the--salt--of--“....

His voice had been fading away thinner and thinner and smaller and
smaller--now it was like the shadow of a voice; now it trembled and
quivered out into silence and was gone.

And with the voice of old Bidpai the pleasant Land of Twilight was also
gone. As a breath fades away from a mirror, so had it faded and vanished
into nothingness.

I opened my eyes.

There was a yellow light--it came from the evening lamp. There were
people of flesh and blood around--my own dear people--and they were
talking together. There was the library with the rows of books looking
silently out from their shelves. There was the fire of hickory logs
crackling and snapping in the fireplace, and throwing a wavering, yellow
light on the wall.

Had I been asleep? No; I had been in Twilight Land.

And now the pleasant Twilight Land had gone. It had faded out, and I was
back again in the work-a-day world.

There I was sitting in my chair; and, what was more, it was time for the
children to go to bed.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Twilight Land, by Howard Pyle

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWILIGHT LAND ***

***** This file should be named 1751-0.txt or 1751-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/5/1751/

Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Antonina, by Wilkie Collins

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Antonina

Author: Wilkie Collins

Posting Date: April 21, 2009 [EBook #3606]
Release Date: February 26, 2007
First Posted: June 12, 2001

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANTONINA ***




Produced by Bronwyn Margaret Evans.  HTML version by Al Haines.









ANTONINA

OR, THE FALL OF ROME


by

WILKIE COLLINS




PREFACE

In preparing to compose a fiction founded on history, the writer of
these pages thought it no necessary requisite of such a work that the
principal characters appearing in it should be drawn from the
historical personages of the period.  On the contrary, he felt that
some very weighty objections attached to this plan of composition.  He
knew well that it obliged a writer to add largely from invention to
what was actually known--to fill in with the colouring of romantic
fancy the bare outline of historic fact--and thus to place the
novelist's fiction in what he could not but consider most unfavourable
contrast to the historian's truth.  He was further by no means
convinced that any story in which historical characters supplied the
main agents, could be preserved in its fit unity of design and
restrained within its due limits of development, without some
falsification or confusion of historical dates--a species of poetical
licence of which he felt no disposition to avail himself, as it was his
main anxiety to make his plot invariably arise and proceed out of the
great events of the era exactly in the order in which they occurred.

Influenced, therefore, by these considerations, he thought that by
forming all his principal characters from imagination, he should be
able to mould them as he pleased to the main necessities of the story;
to display them, without any impropriety, as influenced in whatever
manner appeared most strikingly interesting by its minor incidents; and
further, to make them, on all occasions, without trammel or hindrance,
the practical exponents of the spirit of the age, of all the various
historical illustrations of the period, which the Author's researches
among conflicting but equally important authorities had enabled him to
garner up, while, at the same time, the appearance of verisimilitude
necessary to an historical romance might, he imagined, be successfully
preserved by the occasional introduction of the living characters of
the era, in those portions of the plot comprising events with which
they had been remarkably connected.

On this plan the recent work has been produced.


To the fictitious characters alone is committed the task of
representing the spirit of the age. The Roman emperor, Honorius, and
the Gothic king, Alaric, mix but little personally in the business of
the story--only appearing in such events, and acting under such
circumstances, as the records of history strictly authorise; but exact
truth in respect to time, place, and circumstance is observed in every
historical event introduced in the plot, from the period of the march
of the Gothic invaders over the Alps to the close of the first
barbarian blockade of Rome.



CONTENTS.


CHAPTER 1.  GOISVINTHA.

CHAPTER 2.  THE COURT.

CHAPTER 3.  ROME.

CHAPTER 4.  THE CHURCH.

CHAPTER 5.  ANTONINA.

CHAPTER 6.  AN APPRENTICESHIP TO THE TEMPLE.

CHAPTER 7.  THE BED-CHAMBER.

CHAPTER 8.  THE GOTHS.

CHAPTER 9.  THE TWO INTERVIEWS.

CHAPTER 10.  THE RIFT IN THE WALL.

CHAPTER 11.  GOISVINTHA'S RETURN.

CHAPTER 12.  THE PASSAGE OF THE WALL.

CHAPTER 13.  THE HOUSE IN THE SUBURBS.

CHAPTER 14.  THE FAMINE.

CHAPTER 15.  THE CITY AND THE GODS.

CHAPTER 16.  LOVE MEETINGS.

CHAPTER 17.  THE HUNS.

CHAPTER 18.  THE FARM-HOUSE.

CHAPTER 19.  THE GUARDIAN RESTORED.

CHAPTER 20.  THE BREACH REPASSED.

CHAPTER 21.  FATHER AND CHILD.

CHAPTER 22.  THE BANQUET OF FAMINE.

CHAPTER 23.  THE LAST EFFORTS OF THE BESIEGED.

CHAPTER 24.  THE GRAVE AND THE CAMP.

CHAPTER 25.  THE TEMPLE AND THE CHURCH.

CHAPTER 26.  RETRIBUTION.

CHAPTER 27.  THE VIGIL OF HOPE.

THE CONCLUSION.  'UBI THESAURUS IBI COR.'



CHAPTER 1.

GOISVINTHA.

The mountains forming the range of Alps which border on the
north-eastern confines of Italy, were, in the autumn of the year 408,
already furrowed in numerous directions by the tracks of the invading
forces of those northern nations generally comprised under the
appellation of Goths.

In some places these tracks were denoted on either side by fallen
trees, and occasionally assumed, when half obliterated by the ravages
of storms, the appearance of desolate and irregular marshes.  In other
places they were less palpable.  Here, the temporary path was entirely
hidden by the incursions of a swollen torrent; there, it was faintly
perceptible in occasional patches of soft ground, or partly traceable
by fragments of abandoned armour, skeletons of horses and men, and
remnants of the rude bridges which had once served for passage across a
river or transit over a precipice.

Among the rocks of the topmost of the range of mountains immediately
overhanging the plains of Italy, and presenting the last barrier to the
exertions of a traveller or the march of an invader, there lay, at the
beginning of the fifth century, a little lake.  Bounded on three sides
by precipices, its narrow banks barren of verdure or habitations, and
its dark and stagnant waters brightened but rarely by the presence of
the lively sunlight, this solitary spot--at all times
mournful--presented, on the autumn of the day when our story commences,
an aspect of desolation at once dismal to the eye and oppressive to the
heart.

It was near noon; but no sun appeared in the heaven.  The dull clouds,
monotonous in colour and form, hid all beauty in the firmament, and
shed heavy darkness on the earth.  Dense, stagnant vapours clung to the
mountain summits; from the drooping trees dead leaves and rotten
branches sunk, at intervals, on the oozy soil, or whirled over the
gloomy precipice; and a small steady rain fell, slow and
unintermitting, upon the deserts around.  Standing upon the path which
armies had once trodden, and which armies were still destined to tread,
and looking towards the solitary lake, you heard, at first, no sound
but the regular dripping of the rain-drops from rock to rock; you saw
no prospect but the motionless waters at your feet, and the dusky crags
which shadowed them from above.  When, however, impressed by the
mysterious loneliness of the place, the eye grew more penetrating and
the ear more attentive, a cavern became apparent in the precipices
round the lake; and, in the intervals of the heavy rain-drops, were
faintly perceptible the sounds of a human voice.

The mouth of the cavern was partly concealed by a large stone, on which
were piled some masses of rotten brushwood, as if for the purpose of
protecting any inhabitant it might contain from the coldness of the
atmosphere without.  Placed at the eastward boundary of the lake, this
strange place of refuge commanded a view not only of the rugged path
immediately below it, but of a large plot of level ground at a short
distance to the west, which overhung a second and lower range of rocks.
From this spot might be seen far beneath, on days when the atmosphere
was clear, the olive grounds that clothed the mountain's base, and
beyond, stretching away to the distant horizon, the plains of fated
Italy, whose destiny of defeat and shame was now hastening to its dark
and fearful accomplishment.

The cavern, within, was low and irregular in form.  From its rugged
walls the damp oozed forth upon its floor of decayed moss.  Lizards and
noisome animals had tenanted its comfortless recesses undisturbed,
until the period we have just described, when their miserable rights
were infringed on for the first time by human intruders.

A woman crouched near the entrance of the place.  More within, on the
driest part of the ground, lay a child asleep.  Between them were
scattered some withered branches and decayed leaves, which were
arranged as if to form a fire.  In many parts this scanty collection of
fuel was slightly blackened; but, wetted as it was by the rain, all
efforts to light it permanently had evidently been fruitless.

The woman's head was bent forwards, and her face, hid in her hands,
rested on her knees.  At intervals she muttered to herself in a hoarse,
moaning voice.  A portion of her scanty clothing had been removed to
cover the child.  What remained on her was composed, partly of skins of
animals, partly of coarse cotton cloth.  In many places this miserable
dress was marked with blood, and her long, flaxen hair bore upon its
dishevelled locks the same ominous and repulsive stain.

The child seemed scarcely four years of age, and showed on his pale,
thin face all the peculiarities of his Gothic origin.  His features
seemed to have been once beautiful, both in expression and form; but a
deep wound, extending the whole length of his cheek, had now deformed
him for ever.  He shivered and trembled in his sleep, and every now and
then mechanically stretched forth his little arms towards the dead cold
branches that were scattered before him.

Suddenly a large stone became detached from the rock in a distant part
of the cavern, and fell noisily to the ground.  At this sound he woke
with a scream--raised himself--endeavoured to advance towards the
woman, and staggered backward against the side of the cave.  A second
wound in the leg had wreaked that destruction on his vigour which the
first had effected on his beauty.  He was a cripple.

At the instant of his awakening the woman had started up.  She now
raised him from the ground, and taking some herbs from her bosom,
applied them to his wounded cheek.  By this action her dress became
discomposed:  it was stiff at the top with coagulated blood, which had
evidently flowed from a cut in her neck.

All her attempts to compose the child were in vain; he moaned and wept
piteously, muttering at intervals his disjointed exclamations of
impatience at the coldness of the place and the agony of his recent
wounds.  Speechless and tearless the wretched woman looked vacantly
down on his face.  There was little difficulty in discerning from that
fixed, distracted gaze the nature of the tie that bound the mourning
woman to the suffering boy.  The expression of rigid and awful despair
that lowered in her fixed, gloomy eyes, the livid paleness that
discoloured her compressed lips, the spasms that shook her firm,
commanding form, mutely expressing in the divine eloquence of human
emotion that between the solitary pair there existed the most intimate
of earth's relationships--the connection of mother and child.

For some time no change occurred in the woman's demeanour.  At last, as
if struck by some sudden suspicion, she rose, and clasping the child in
one arm, displaced with the other the brushwood at the entrance of her
place of refuge, cautiously looking forth on all that the mists left
visible of the western landscape.  After a short survey she drew back
as if reassured by the unbroken solitude of the place, and turning
towards the lake, looked down upon the black waters at her feet.

'Night has succeeded to night,' she muttered gloomily, 'and has brought
no succour to my body, and no hope to my heart!  Mile on mile have I
journeyed, and danger is still behind, and loneliness for ever before.
The shadow of death deepens over the boy; the burden of anguish grows
weightier than I can bear.  For me, friends are murdered, defenders are
distant, possessions are lost.  The God of the Christian priests has
abandoned us to danger and deserted us in woe.  It is for me to end the
struggle for us both.  Our last refuge has been in this place--our
sepulchre shall be here as well!'

With one last look at the cold and comfortless sky, she advanced to the
very edge of the lake's precipitous bank.  Already the child was raised
in her arms, and her body bent to accomplish successfully the fatal
spring, when a sound in the east--faint, distant, and fugitive--caught
her ear.  In an instant her eye brightened, her chest heaved, her cheek
flushed.  She exerted the last relics of her wasted strength to gain a
prominent position upon a ledge of the rocks behind her, and waited in
an agony of expectation for a repetition of that magic sound.


In a moment more she heard it again--for the child, stupefied with
terror at the action that had accompanied her determination to plunge
with him into the lake, now kept silence, and she could listen
undisturbed.  To unpractised ears the sound that so entranced her would
have been scarcely audible.  Even the experienced traveller would have
thought it nothing more than the echo of a fallen stone among the rocks
in the eastward distance.  But to her it was no unimportant sound, for
it gave the welcome signal of deliverance and delight.

As the hour wore on, it came nearer and nearer, tossed about by the
sportive echoes, and now clearly betraying that its origin was, as she
had at first divined, the note of the Gothic trumpet. Soon the distant
music ceased, and was succeeded by another sound, low and rumbling, as
of an earthquake afar off or a rising thunderstorm, and changing, ere
long, to a harsh confused noise, like the rustling of a mighty wind
through whole forests of brushwood.

At this instant the woman lost all command over herself; her former
patience and caution deserted her; reckless of danger, she placed the
child upon the ledge on which she had been standing; and, though
trembling in every limb, succeeded in mounting so much higher on the
crag as to gain a fissure near the top of the rock, which commanded an
uninterrupted view of the vast tracts of uneven ground leading in an
easterly direction to the next range of precipices and ravines.

One after another the long minutes glided on, and, though much was
still audible, nothing was yet to be seen.  At length the shrill sound
of the trumpet again rang through the dull, misty air, and the next
instant the advance guard of an army of Goths emerged from the distant
woods.

Then, after an interval, the multitudes of the main body thronged
through every outlet in the trees, and spread in dusky masses over the
desert ground that lay between the woods and the rocks about the
borders of the lake.  The front ranks halted, as if to communicate with
the crowds of the rearguard and the stragglers among the baggage
waggons, who still poured forth, apparently in interminable hosts, from
the concealment of the distant trees.  The advanced troops, evidently
with the intention of examining the roads, still marched rapidly on,
until they gained the foot of the ascent leading to the crags to which
the woman still clung, and from which, with eager attention, she still
watched their movements.

Placed in a situation of the extremest peril, her strength was her only
preservative against the danger of slipping from her high and narrow
elevation.  Hitherto the moral excitement of expectation had given her
the physical power necessary to maintain her position; but just as the
leaders of the guard arrived at the cavern, her over-wrought energies
suddenly deserted her; her hands relaxed their grasp; she tottered, and
would have sunk backwards to instant destruction, had not the skins
wrapped about her bosom and waist become entangled with a point of one
of the jagged rocks immediately around her.  Fortunately--for she could
utter no cry--the troops halted at this instant to enable their horses
to gain breath.  Two among them at once perceived her position and
detected her nation.  They mounted the rocks; and, while one possessed
himself of the child, the other succeeded in rescuing the mother and
bearing her safely to the ground.

The snorting of horses, the clashing of weapons, the confusion of loud,
rough voices, which now startled the native silence of the solitary
lake, and which would have bewildered and overwhelmed most persons in
the woman's exhausted condition, seemed, on the contrary, to reassure
her feelings and reanimate her powers.  She disengaged herself from her
preserver's support, and taking her child in her arms, advanced towards
a man of gigantic stature, whose rich armour sufficiently announced
that his position in the army was one of command.

'I am Goisvintha,' said she, in a firm, calm voice--'sister to
Hermanric.  I have escaped from the massacre of the hostages of
Aquileia with one child.  Is my brother with the army of the king?'

This declaration produced a marked change in the bystanders.  The looks
of indifference or curiosity which they had at first cast on the
fugitive, changed to the liveliest expression of wonder and respect.
The chieftain whom she had addressed raised the visor of his helmet so
as to uncover his face, answered her question in the affirmative, and
ordered two soldiers to conduct her to the temporary encampment of the
main army in the rear.  As she turned to depart, an old man advanced,
leaning on his long, heavy sword, and accosted her thus--

'I am Withimer, whose daughter was left hostage with the Romans in
Aquileia.  Is she of the slain or of the escaped?'

'Her bones rot under the city walls,' was the answer.  'The Romans made
of her a feast for the dogs.'

No word or tear escaped the old warrior.  He turned in the direction of
Italy; but, as he looked downwards towards the plains, his brow
lowered, and his hands tightened mechanically round the hilt of his
enormous weapon.

The same gloomy question was propounded to Goisvintha by the two men
who guided her to the army that had been asked by their aged comrade.
It received the same terrible answer, which was borne with the same
stern composure, and followed by the same ominous glance in the
direction of Italy, as in the instance of the veteran Withimer.

Leading the horse that carried the exhausted woman with the utmost
care, and yet with wonderful rapidity, down the paths which they had so
recently ascended, the men in a short space of time reached the place
where the army had halted, and displayed to Goisvintha, in all the
majesty of numbers and repose, the vast martial assemblage of the
warriors of the North.

No brightness gleamed from their armour; no banners waved over their
heads; no music sounded among their ranks.  Backed by the dreary woods,
which still disgorged unceasing additions to the warlike multitude
already encamped; surrounded by the desolate crags which showed dim,
wild, and majestic through the darkness of the mist; covered with the
dusky clouds which hovered motionless over the barren mountain tops,
and poured their stormy waters on the uncultivated plains--all that the
appearance of the Goths had of solemnity in itself was in awful harmony
with the cold and mournful aspect that the face of Nature had assumed.
Silent--menacing--dark,--the army looked the fit embodiment of its
leader's tremendous purpose--the subjugation of Rome.

Conducting Goisvintha quickly through the front files of warriors, her
guides, pausing at a spot of ground which shelved upwards at right
angles with the main road from the woods, desired her to dismount; and
pointing to the group that occupied the place, said, 'Yonder is Alaric
the king, and with him is Hermanric thy brother.'

At whatever point of view it could have been regarded, the assemblage
of persons thus indicated to Goisvintha must have arrested inattention
itself.  Near a confused mass of weapons, scattered on the ground,
reclined a group of warriors apparently listening to the low, muttered
conversation of three men of great age, who rose above them, seated on
pieces of rock, and whose long white hair, rough skin dresses, and lean
tottering forms appeared in strong contrast with the iron-clad and
gigantic figures of their auditors beneath.  Above the old men, on the
highroad, was one of Alaric's waggons; and on the heaps of baggage
piled against its clumsy wheels had been chosen resting-place of the
future conqueror of Rome.  The top of the vehicle seemed absolutely
teeming with a living burden.  Perched in every available nook and
corner were women and children of all ages, and weapons and live stock
of all varieties. Now, a child--lively, mischievous,
inquisitive--peered forth over the head of a battering-ram. Now, a
lean, hungry sheep advanced his inquiring nostrils sadly to the open
air, and displayed by the movement the head of a withered old woman
pillowed on his woolly flanks.  Here, appeared a young girl struggling,
half entombed in shields.  There, gasped an emaciated camp-follower,
nearly suffocated in heaps of furs. The whole scene, with its
background of great woods, drenched in a vapour of misty rain, with its
striking contrasts at one point and its solemn harmonies at another,
presented a vast combination of objects that either startled or awed--a
gloomy conjunction of the menacing and the sublime.


Bidding Goisvintha wait near the waggon, one of her conductors
approached and motioned aside a young man standing near the king.  As
the warrior rose to obey the demand, he displayed, with all the
physical advantages of his race, and ease and elasticity of movement
unusual among the men of his nation.  At the instant when he joined the
soldier who had accosted him, his face was partially concealed by an
immense helmet, crowned with a boar's head, the mouth of which, forced
open at death, gaped wide, as if still raging for prey.  But the man
had scarcely stated his errand, when he started violently, removed the
grim appendage of war, and hastened bare-headed to the side of the
waggon where Goisvintha awaited his approach.

The instant he was beheld by the woman, she hastened to meet him;
placed the wounded child in his arms, and greeted him with these
words:--

'Your brother served in the armies of Rome when our people were at
peace with the Empire. Of his household and his possessions this is all
that the Romans have left!'

She ceased, and for an instant the brother and sister regarded each
other in touching and expressive silence.  Though, in addition to the
general characteristics of country, the countenances of the two
naturally bore the more particular evidences of community of blood, all
resemblance between them at this instant--so wonderful is the power of
expression over feature--had utterly vanished.  The face and manner of
the young man (he had numbered only twenty years) expressed a deep
sorrow, manly in its stern tranquility, sincere in its perfect
innocence of display.  As he looked on the child, his blue
eyes--bright, piercing, and lively--softened like a woman's; his lips,
hardly hidden by his short beard, closed and quivered; and his chest
heaved under the armour that lay upon its noble proportions.  There was
in this simple, speechless, tearless melancholy--this exquisite
consideration of triumphant strength for suffering weakness--something
almost sublime; opposed as it was to the emotions of malignity and
despair that appeared in Goisvintha's features.  The ferocity that
gleamed from her dilated, glaring eyes, the sinister markings that
appeared round her pale and parted lips, the swelling of the large
veins, drawn to their extremest point of tension on her lofty forehead,
so distorted her countenance, that the brother and sister, as they
stood together, seemed in expression to have changed sexes for the
moment.  From the warrior came pity for the sufferer; from the mother,
indignation for the offence.

Arousing himself from his melancholy contemplation of the child, and as
yet answering not a word to Goisvintha, Hermanric mounted the waggon,
and placing the last of his sister's offspring in the arms of a
decrepid old woman, who sat brooding over some bundles of herbs spread
out upon her lap, addressed her thus:--

'These wounds are from the Romans.  Revive the child, and you shall be
rewarded from the spoils of Rome.'

'Ha! ha! ha!' chuckled the crone; 'Hermanric is an illustrious warrior,
and shall be obeyed. Hermanric is great, for his arm can slay; but
Brunechild is greater than he, for her cunning can cure!'

As if anxious to verify this boast before the warrior's eyes, the old
woman immediately began the preparation of the necessary dressings from
her store of herbs; but Hermanric waited not to be a witness of her
skill.  With one final look at the pale, exhausted child, he slowly
descended from the waggon, and approaching Goisvintha, drew her towards
a sheltered position near the ponderous vehicle.  Here he seated
himself by her side, prepared to listen with the deepest attention to
her recital of the scenes of terror and suffering through which she had
so recently passed.

'You,' she began, 'born while our nation was at peace; transported from
the field of war to those distant provinces where tranquility still
prevailed; preserved throughout your childhood from the chances of
battle; advanced to the army in your youth, only when its toils are
past and its triumphs are already at hand--you alone have escaped the
miseries of our people, to partake in the glory of their approaching
revenge.

'Hardly had a year passed since you had been removed from the
settlements of the Goths when I wedded Priulf.  The race of triflers to
whom he was then allied, spite of their Roman haughtiness, deferred to
him in their councils, and confessed among their legions that he was
brave.  I saw myself with joy the wife of a warrior of renown; I
believed, in my pride, that I was destined to be the mother of a race
of heroes; when suddenly there came news to us that the Emperor
Theodosius was dead.  Then followed anarchy among the people of the
soil, and outrages on the liberties of their allies, the Goths.  Ere
long the call to arms arose among our nation.  Soon our waggons of war
were rolled across the frozen Danube; our soldiers quitted the Roman
camp; our husbandmen took their weapons from their cottage walls; we
that were women prepared with our children to follow our husbands to
the field; and Alaric, the king, came forth as the leader of our hosts.

'We marched upon the territories of the Greeks.  But how shall I tell
you of the events of those years of war that followed our invasion; of
the glory of our victories; of the hardships of our defences; of the
miseries of our retreats; of the hunger that we vanquished; of the
diseases that we endured; of the shameful peace that was finally
ratified, against the wishes of our king!  How shall I tell of all
this, when my thoughts are on the massacre from which I have just
escaped--when these first evils, though once remembered in anguish,
are, even now, forgotten in the superior horrors that ensued!

'The truce was made.  Alaric departed with the remnant of his army, and
encamped at AEmona, on the confines of that land which he had already
invaded, and which he is now prepared to conquer.  Between our king and
Stilicho, the general of the Romans, passed many messages, for the
leaders disputed on the terms of the peace that should be finally
ordained. Meanwhile, as an earnest of the Gothic faith, bands of our
warriors, and among them Priulf, were despatched into Italy to be
allies once more of the legions of Rome, and with them they took their
wives and their children, to be detained as hostages in the cities
throughout the land.

'I and my children were conducted to Aquileia.  In a dwelling within
the city we were lodged with our possessions.  It was night when I took
leave of Priulf, my husband, at the gates.  I watched him as he
departed with the army, and, when the darkness hid him from my eyes, I
re-entered the town; from which I am the only woman of our nation who
has escaped alive.'

As she pronounced these last words, Goisvintha's manner, which had
hitherto been calm and collected, began to change:  she paused abruptly
in her narrative, her head sunk upon her breast, her frame quivered as
if convulsed with violent agony.  When she turned towards Hermanric
after an interval of silence to address him again, the same malignant
expression lowered over her countenance that had appeared on it when
she presented to him her wounded child; her voice became broken,
hoarse, and unfeminine; and pressing closely to the young man's side,
she laid her trembling fingers on his arm, as if to bespeak his most
undivided attention.

'Time grew on,' she continued, 'and still there came no tidings that
the peace was finally secured.  We, that were hostages, lived separate
from the people of the town; for we felt enmity towards each other even
then. In my captivity there was no employment for me but patience--no
pursuit but hope.  Alone with my children, I was wont to look forth
over the sea towards the camp of our king; but day succeeded to day,
and his warriors appeared not on the plains; nor did Priulf return with
the legions to encamp before the gates of the town.  So I mourned in my
loneliness; for my heart yearned towards the homes of my people; I
longed once more to look upon my husband's face, and to behold again
the ranks of our warriors, and the majesty of their battle array.


'But already, when the great day of despair was quickly drawing near, a
bitter outrage was preparing for me alone.  The men who had hitherto
watched us were changed, and of the number of the new guards was one
who cast on me the eyes of lust.  Night after night he poured his
entreaties into my unwilling ear; for, in his vanity and shamelessness,
he believed that I, who was Gothic and the wife of a Goth, might be won
by him whose parentage was but Roman!  Soon from prayers he rose to
threats; and one night, appearing before me with smiles, he cried out
that Stilicho, whose desire was to make peace with the Goths, had
suffered, for his devotion to our people, the penalty of death; that a
time of ruin was approaching for us all, and that he alone--whom I
despised--could preserve me from the anger of Rome.  As he ceased he
approached me; but I, who had been in many battle-fields, felt no dread
at the prospect of war, and I spurned him with laughter from my
presence.

'Then, for a few nights more, my enemy approached me not again.  Until
one evening, as I sat on the terrace before the house, with the child
that you have beheld, a helmet-crest suddenly fell at my feet, and a
voice cried to me from the garden beneath:  'Priulf thy husband has
been slain in a quarrel by the soldiers of Rome!  Already the legions
with whom he served are on their way to the town; for a massacre of the
hostages is ordained.  Speak but the word, and I can save thee even
yet!'

'I looked on the crest.  It was bloody, and it was his!  For an instant
my heart writhed within me as I thought on my warrior whom I had loved!
Then, as I heard the messenger of death retire, cursing, from his
lurking-place in the garden, I recollected that now my children had
none but their mother to defend them, and that peril was preparing for
them from the enemies of their race.  Besides the little one in my
arms, I had two that were sleeping in the house.  As I looked round,
bewildered and in despair, to see if a chance were left us to escape,
there rang through the evening stillness the sound of a trumpet, and
the tramp of armed men was audible in the street beneath.  Then, from
all quarters of the town rose, as one sudden sound, the shrieks of
women and the yells of men.  Already, as I rushed towards my children's
beds, the fiends of Rome had mounted the stairs, and waved in bloody
triumph their reeking swords!  I gained the steps; and, as I looked up,
they flung down at me the body of my youngest child.  O Hermanric!
Hermanric! it was the most beautiful and the most beloved!  What the
priests say that God should be to us, that, the fairest one of my
offspring, was to me!  As I saw it mutilated and dead--I, who but an
hour before had hushed it on my bosom to rest!--my courage forsook me,
and when the murderers advanced on me I staggered and fell.  I felt the
sword-point enter my neck; I saw the dagger gleam over the child in my
arms; I heard the death-shriek of the last victim above; and then my
senses failed me, and I could listen and move no more!

'Long must I have lain motionless at the foot of those fatal stairs;
for when I awoke from my trance the noises in the city were hushed, and
from her place in the firmament the moon shone softly into the deserted
house.  I listened, to be certain that I was alone with my murdered
children.  No sound was in the dwelling; the assassins had departed,
believing that their labour of blood was ended when I fell beneath
their swords; and I was able to crawl forth in security, and to look my
last upon my offspring that the Romans had slain.  The child that I
held to my breast still breathed.  I stanched with some fragments of my
garment the wounds that he had received, and laying him gently by the
stairs--in the moonlight, so that I might see him when he moved--I
groped in the shadow of the wall for my first murdered and my last
born; for that youngest and fairest one of my offspring whom they had
slaughtered before my eyes!  When I touched the corpse, it was wet with
blood; I felt its face, and it was cold beneath my hands; I raised its
body in my arms, and its limbs already were rigid in death!  Then I
thought of the eldest child, who lay dead in the chamber above.  But my
strength was failing me fast.  I had an infant who might yet be
preserved; and I knew that if morning dawned on me in the house, all
chances of escape were lost for ever.  So, though my heart was cold
within me at leaving my child's corpse to the mercy of the Romans, I
took up the dead and the wounded one in my arms, and went forth into
the garden, and thence towards the seaward quarter of the town.


'I passed through the forsaken streets.  Sometimes I stumbled against
the body of a child--sometimes the moonlight showed me the death-pale
face of some woman of my nation whom I had loved, stretched upward to
the sky; but I still advanced until I gained the wall of the town, and
heard on the other side the waters of the river running onward to the
Port of Aquileia and the sea.

'I looked around.  The gates I knew were guarded and closed.  By the
wall was the only prospect of escape; but its top was high and its
sides were smooth when I felt them with my hands.  Despairing and
wearied, I laid my burdens down where they were hidden by the shade,
and walked forward a few paces, for to remain still was a torment that
I could not endure.  At a short distance I saw a soldier sleeping
against the wall of a house.  By his side was a ladder placed against
the window.  As I looked up I beheld the head of a corpse resting on
its top. The victim must have been lately slain, for her blood still
dripped slowly down into an empty wine-pot that stood within the
soldier's reach.  When I saw the ladder, hope revived within me. I
removed it to the wall--I mounted, and laid my dead child on the great
stones at its top--I returned, and placed my wounded boy by the corpse.
Slowly, and with many efforts, I dragged the ladder upwards, until from
its own weight one end fell to the ground on the other side.  As I had
risen so I descended.  In the sand of the river-bank I scraped a hole,
and buried there the corpse of the infant; for I could carry the weight
of two no longer.  Then with my wounded child I reached some caverns
that lay onward near the seashore.  There throughout the next day I lay
hidden--alone with my sufferings of body and my affliction of
heart--until the night came on, when I set forth on my journey to the
mountains; for I knew that at AEmona, in the camp of the warriors of my
people, lay the only refuge that was left to me on earth.  Feebly and
slowly, hiding by day and travelling by night, I kept on my way until I
gained that lake among the rocks, where the guards of the army came
forward and rescued me from death.'

She ceased.  Throughout the latter portion of her narrative her
demeanour had been calm and sad; and as she dwelt, with the painful
industry of grief, over each minute circumstance connected with the
bereavements she had sustained, her voice softened to those accents of
quiet mournfulness, which make impressive the most simple words, and
render musical the most unsteady tones.  It seemed as if those tenderer
and kinder emotions, which the attractions of her offspring had once
generated in her character, had at the bidding of memory become
revivified in her manner while she lingered over the recital of their
deaths.  For a brief space of time she looked fixedly and anxiously
upon the countenance of Hermanric, which was half averted from her, and
expressed a fierce and revengeful gloom that sat unnaturally on it
noble lineaments.  Then turning from him, she buried her face in her
hands, and made no effort more to attract him to attention or incite
him to reply.

This solemn silence kept by the bereaved woman and the brooding man had
lasted but a few minutes, when a harsh, trembling voice was heard from
the top of the waggon, calling at intervals, 'Hermanric!  Hermanric!'

At first the young man remained unmoved by those discordant and
repulsive tones.  They repeated his name, however, so often and so
perseveringly, that he noticed them ere long; and rising suddenly, as
if impatient of the interruption, advanced towards the side of the
waggon from which the mysterious summons appeared to come.

As he looked up towards the vehicle the voice ceased, and he saw that
the old woman to whom he had confided the child was the person who had
called him so hurriedly but a few moments before.  Her tottering body,
clothed in bear-skins, was bent forward over a large triangular shield
of polished brass, on which she leant her lank, shrivelled arms.  Her
head shook with a tremulous, palsied action; a leer, half smile, half
grimace, distended her withered lips and lightened her sunken eyes.
Sinister, cringing, repulsive; her face livid with the reflection from
the weapon that was her support, and her figure scarcely human in the
rugged garments that encompassed its gaunt proportions, she seemed a
deformity set up by evil spirits to mock the majesty of the human
form--an embodied satire on all that is most deplorable in infirmity
and most disgusting in age.


The instant she discerned Hermanric, she stretched her body out still
farther over the shield; and pointing to the interior of the waggon,
muttered softly that one fearful and expressive word--dead!

Without waiting for any further explanation, the young Goth mounted the
vehicle, and gaining the old woman's side, saw stretched on her
collection of herbs--beautiful in the sublime and melancholy stillness
of death--the corpse of Goisvintha's last child.

'Is Hermanric wroth?' whined the hag, quailing before the steady,
rebuking glance of the young man.  'When I said that Brunechild was
greater than Hermanric, I lied.  It is Hermanric that is most powerful!
See, the dressings were placed on the wounds; and, though the child has
died, shall not the treasures that were promised me be mine?  I have
done what I could, but my cunning begins to desert me, for I am
old--old--old!  I have seen my generation pass away! Aha!  I am old,
Hermanric, I am old!'

When the young warrior looked on the child, he saw that the hag had
spoken truth, and that the victim had died from no fault of hers.  Pale
and serene, the countenance of the boy showed how tranquil had been his
death.  The dressings had been skilfully composed and carefully applied
to his wounds, but suffering and privation had annihilated the
feebleness of human resistance in their march toward the last dread
goal, and the treachery of Imperial Rome had once more triumphed as was
its wont, and triumphed over a child!

As Hermanric descended with the corpse Goisvintha was the first object
that met his eyes when he alighted on the ground.  The mother received
from him the lifeless burden without an exclamation or a tear.  That
emanation from her former and kinder self which had been produced by
the closing recital of her sufferings was henceforth, at the signal of
her last child's death, extinguished in her for ever!

'His wounds had crippled him,' said the young man gloomily.  'He could
never have fought with the warriors!  Our ancestors slew themselves
when they were no longer vigorous for the fight.  It is better that he
has died!'

'Vengeance!' gasped Goisvintha, pressing up closely to his side.  'We
will have vengeance for the massacre of Aquileia!  When blood is
streaming in the palaces of Rome, remember my murdered children, and
hasten not to sheathe thy sword!'

At this instant, as if to rouse still further the fierce determination
that appeared already in the face of the young Goth, the voice of
Alaric was heard commanding the army to advance. Hermanric started, and
drew the panting woman after him to the resting-place of the king.
There, armed at all points, and rising, by his superior stature, high
above the throng around him, stood the dreaded captain of the Gothic
hosts.  His helmet was raised so as to display his clear blue eyes
gleaming over the multitude around him; he pointed with his sword in
the direction of Italy; and as rank by rank the men started to their
arms, and prepared exultingly for the march, his lips parted with a
smile of triumph, and ere he moved to accompany them he spoke thus:--

'Warriors of the Goths, our halt is a short one among the mountains;
but let not the weary repine, for the glorious resting-place that
awaits our labours is the city of Rome!  The curse of Odin, when in the
infancy of our nation he retired before the myriads of the Empire, it
is our privilege to fulfil!  That future destruction which he denounced
against Rome, it is ours to effect!  Remember your hostages that the
Romans have slain; your possessions that the Romans have seized; your
trust that the Romans have betrayed!  Remember that I, your king, have
within me that supernatural impulse which never deceives, and which
calls to me in a voice of encouragement--Advance, and the Empire is
thine!  Assemble the warriors, and the City of the World shall be
delivered to the conquering Goths!  Let us onward without delay! Our
prey awaits us!  Our triumph is near!  Our vengeance is at hand!'

He paused; and at that moment the trumpet gave signal for the march.


'Up! up!' cried Hermanric, seizing Goisvintha by the arm, and pointing
to the waggon which had already begun to move; 'make ready for the
journey!  I will charge myself with the burial of the child.  Yet a few
days and our encampment may be before Aquileia.  Be patient, and I will
avenge thee in the palaces of Rome!'

The mighty mass moved.  The multitude stretched forth over the barren
ground; and even now the warriors in front of the army might be seen by
those in the rear mounting the last range of passes that lay between
the plains of Italy and the Goths.



CHAPTER 2.

THE COURT.

The traveller who so far departs from the ordinary track of tourists in
modern Italy as to visit the city of Ravenna, remembers with
astonishment, as he treads its silent and melancholy streets, and
beholds vineyards and marshes spread over an extent of four miles
between the Adriatic and the town, that this place, now half deserted,
was once the most populous of Roman fortresses; and that where fields
and woods now present themselves to his eyes the fleets of the Empire
once rode securely at anchor, and the merchant of Rome disembarked his
precious cargoes at his warehouse door.

As the power of Rome declined, the Adriatic, by a strange fatality,
began to desert the fortress whose defence it had hitherto secured.
Coeval with the gradual degeneracy of the people was the gradual
withdrawal of the ocean from the city walls; until, at the beginning of
the sixth century, a grove of pines already appeared where the port of
Augustus once existed.

At the period of our story--though the sea had even then receded
perceptibly--the ditches round the walls were yet filled, and the
canals still ran through the city in much the same manner as they
intersect Venice at the present time.

On the morning that we are about to describe, the autumn had advanced
some days since the events mentioned in the preceding chapter.
Although the sun was now high in the eastern horizon, the restlessness
produced by the heat emboldened a few idlers of Ravenna to brave the
sultriness of the atmosphere, in the vain hope of being greeted by a
breeze from the Adriatic as they mounted the seaward ramparts of the
town.  On attaining their destined elevation, these sanguine citizens
turned their faces with fruitless and despairing industry towards every
point of the compass, but no breath of air came to reward their
perseverance. Nothing could be more thoroughly suggestive of the
undiminished universality of the heat than the view, in every
direction, from the position they then occupied.  The stone houses of
the city behind them glowed with a vivid brightness overpowering to the
strongest eyes. The light curtains hung motionless over the lonely
windows.  No shadows varied the brilliant monotony of the walls, or
softened the lively glitter on the waters of the fountains beneath. Not
a ripple stirred the surface of the broad channel, that now replaced
the ancient harbour. Not a breath of wind unfolded the scorching sails
of the deserted vessels at the quay.  Over the marshes in the distance
hung a hot, quivering mist; and in the vineyards, near the town, not a
leaf waved upon its slender stem.  On the seaward side lay, vast and
level, the prospect of the burning sand; and beyond it the main
ocean--waveless, torpid, and suffused in a flood of fierce
brightness--stretched out to the cloudless horizon that closed the
sunbright view.


Within the town, in those streets where the tall houses cast a deep
shadow on the flagstones of the road, the figures of a few slaves might
here and there be seen sleeping against the walls, or gossiping
languidly on the faults of their respective lords.  Sometimes an old
beggar might be observed hunting on the well-stocked preserves of his
own body the lively vermin of the South.  Sometimes a restless child
crawled from a doorstep to paddle in the stagnant waters of a kennel;
but, with the exception of these doubtful evidences of human industry,
the prevailing characteristic of the few groups of the lowest orders of
the people which appeared in the streets was the most listless and
utter indolence.  All that gave splendour to the city at other hours of
the day was at this period hidden from the eye.  The elegant courtiers
reclined in their lofty chambers; the guards on duty ensconced
themselves in angles of walls and recesses of porticoes; the graceful
ladies slumbered on perfumed couches in darkened rooms; the gilded
chariots were shut into the carriage-houses; the prancing horses were
confined in the stables; and even the wares in the market-places were
removed from exposure to the sun.  It was clear that the luxurious
inhabitants of Ravenna recognised no duties of sufficient importance,
and no pleasures of sufficient attraction, to necessitate the exposure
of their susceptible bodies to the noontide heat.

To give the reader some idea of the manner in which the indolent
patricians of the Court loitered away their noon, and to satisfy, at
the same time, the exigencies attaching to the conduct of this story,
it is requisite to quit the lounging-places of the plebeians in the
streets for the couches of the nobles in the Emperor's palace.

Passing through the massive entrance gates, crossing the vast hall of
the Imperial abode, with its statues, its marbles, and its guards in
attendance, and thence ascending the noble staircase, the first object
that might on this occasion have attracted the observer, when he gained
the approaches to the private apartments, was a door at an extremity of
the corridor, richly carved and standing half open.  At this spot were
grouped some fifteen or twenty individuals, who conversed by signs, and
maintained in all their movements the most decorous and complete
silence.  Sometimes one of the party stole on tiptoe to the door, and
looked cautiously through, returning almost instantaneously, and
expressing to his next neighbour, by various grimaces, his immense
interest in the sight he had just beheld.  Occasionally there came from
this mysterious chamber sounds resembling the cackling of poultry,
varied now and then by a noise like the falling of a shower of small,
light substances upon a hard floor.  Whenever these sounds were
audible, the members of the party outside the door looked round upon
each other and smiled--some sarcastically, some triumphantly.  A few
among these patient expectants grasped rolls of vellum in their hands;
the rest held nosegays of rare flowers, or supported in their arms
small statues and pictures in mosaic.  Of their number, some were
painters and poets, some orators and philosophers, and some statuaries
and musicians. Among such a motley assemblage of professions,
remarkable in all ages of the world for fostering in their votaries the
vice of irritability, it may seem strange that so quiet and orderly a
behaviour should exist as that just described.  But it is to be
observed that in attending at the palace, these men of genius made sure
at least of outward unanimity among their ranks, by coming equally
prepared with one accomplishment, and equally animated by one hope:
they waited to employ a common agent--flattery; to attain a common
end--gain.

The chamber thus sacred, even from the intrusion of intellectual
inspiration, although richly ornamented, was of no remarkable extent.
At other times the eye might have wandered with delight on the
exquisite plants and flowers, scattered profusely over a noble terrace,
to which a second door in the apartment conducted; but, at the present
moment, the employment of the occupant of the room was of so
extraordinary a nature, that the most attentive observation must have
missed all the inferior characteristics of the place, to settle
immediately on its inhabitant alone.


In the midst of a large flock of poultry, which seemed strangely
misplaced on a floor of marble and under a gilded roof, stood a pale,
thin, debilitated youth, magnificently clothed, and holding in his hand
a silver vase filled with grain, which he ever and anon distributed to
the cackling multitude at his feet.  Nothing could be more pitiably
effeminate than the appearance of this young man.  His eyes were heavy
and vacant, his forehead low and retiring, his cheeks sallow, and his
form curved as if with a premature old age.  An unmeaning smile dilated
his thin, colourless lips; and as he looked down on his strange
favourites, he occasionally whispered to them a few broken expressions
of endearment, almost infantine in their simplicity.  His whole soul
seemed to be engrossed by the labour of distributing his grain, and he
followed the different movements of the poultry with an earnestness of
attention which seemed almost idiotic in its ridiculous intensity.  If
it be asked, why a person so contemptible as this solitary youth has
been introduced with so much care, and described with so much
minuteness, it must be answered, that, though destined to form no
important figure in this work, he played, from his position, a
remarkable part in the great drama on which it is founded--for this
feeder of chickens was no less a person than Honorius, Emperor of Rome.

It is the very imbecility of this man, at such a time as that we now
write on, which invests his character with a fearful interest in the
eye of posterity.  In himself the impersonation of the meanest vices
inherent in the vicious civilisation of his period, to his feebleness
was accorded the terrible responsibility of liberating the
long-prisoned storm whose elements we have attempted to describe in the
preceding chapter.  With just intellect enough to be capricious, and
just determination enough to be mischievous, he was an instrument
fitted for the uses of every ambitious villain who could succeed in
gaining his ear.  To flatter his puerile tyranny, the infatuated
intriguers of the Court rewarded the heroic Stilicho for the rescue of
his country with the penalty of death, and defrauded Alaric of the
moderate concessions that they had solemnly pledged themselves to
perform.  To gratify his vanity, he was paraded in triumph through the
streets of Rome for a victory that others had gained.  To pander to his
arrogance, by an exhibition of the vilest privilege of that power which
had been intrusted to him for good, the massacre of the helpless
hostages, confided by Gothic honour to Roman treachery, was
unhesitatingly ordained; and, finally, to soothe the turbulence of his
unmanly fears, the last act of his unscrupulous councillors, ere the
Empire fell, was to authorise his abandoning his people in the hour of
peril, careless who suffered in defenceless Rome, while he was secure
in fortified Ravenna.  Such was the man under whom the mightiest of the
world's structures was doomed to totter to its fall!  Such was the
figure destined to close a scene which Time and Glory had united to
hallow and adorn!  Raised and supported by a superhuman daring, that
invested the nauseous horrors of incessant bloodshed with a rude and
appalling magnificence, the mistress of nations was now fated to sink
by the most ignoble of defeats, under the most abject of tremblers.
For this had the rough old kingdom shaken off its enemies by swarms
from its vigorous arms!  For this had the doubtful virtues of the
Republic, and the perilous magnificence of the Empire, perplexed and
astonished the world! In such a conclusion as Honorius ended the
dignified barbarities of a Brutus, the polished splendours of an
Augustus, the unearthly atrocities of a Nero, and the immortal virtues
of a Trajan!  Vainly, through the toiling ages, over the ruin of her
noblest hearts, and the prostitution of her grandest intellects, had
Rome striven pitilessly onward, grasping at the shadow--Glory; the fiat
had now gone forth that doomed her to possess herself finally of the
substance--Shame!

When the imperial trifler had exhausted his store of grain, and
satisfied the cravings of his voracious favourites, he was relieved of
his silver vase by two attendants.  The flock of poultry was then
ushered out at one door, while the flock of geniuses was ushered in at
the other.

Leaving the emperor to cast his languid eyes over objects of art for
which he had no admiration, and to open his unwilling ears to
panegyrical orations for which he had no comprehension, we proceed to
introduce the reader to an apartment on the opposite side of the
palace, in which are congregated all the beauty and elegance of his
Court.


Imagine a room two hundred feet long and proportionably broad.  Its
floor is mosaic, wrought into the loveliest patterns.  Its sides are
decorated with immense pillars of variegated marble, the recesses
formed by which are occupied by statues, all arranged in exquisite
variety of attitude, so as to appear to be offering to whoever
approaches them the rare flowers which it is the duty of the attendants
to place in their hands.  The ceiling is painted in fresco, in patterns
and colours harmonising with those on the mosaic floor.  The cornices
are of silver, and decorated with mottoes from the amatory poets of the
day, the letters of which are formed by precious stones.  In the middle
of the room is a fountain throwing up streams of perfumed water, and
surrounded by golden aviaries containing birds of all sizes and
nations.  Three large windows, placed at the eastern extremity of the
apartment, look out upon the Adriatic, but are covered at this hour,
from the outside, with silk curtains of a delicate green shade, which
cast a soft, luxurious light over every object, but are so thinly woven
and so skilfully arranged that the slightest breath of air which moves
without finds its way immediately to the languid occupants of the Court
waiting-room.  The number of these individuals amounts to about fifty
or sixty persons.  By far the larger half of the assemblage are women.
Their black hair tastefully braided into various forms, and adorned
with flowers or precious stones, contrasts elegantly with the brilliant
whiteness of the robes in which they are for the most part clothed.
Some of them are occupied in listlessly watching the movements of the
birds in the aviaries; others hold a languid and whispered conversation
with such of the courtiers as happen to be placed near them.  The men
exhibit in their dresses a greater variety of colour, and in their
occupations a greater fertility of resource, than the women.  Their
garments, of the lightest rose, violet, or yellow tints, diversify
fantastically the monotonous white robes of their gentle companions.
Of their employments, the most conspicuous are playing on the lute,
gaming with dice, teasing their lapdogs, and insulting their parasites.
Whatever their occupation, it is performed with little attention, and
less enthusiasm.  Some recline on their couches with closed eyes, as if
the heat made the labour of using their organs of vision too much for
them; others, in the midst of a conversation, suddenly leave a sentence
unfinished, apparently incapacitated by lassitude from giving
expression to the simplest ideas.  Every sight in the apartment that
attracts the eye, every sound that gains the ear, expresses a luxurious
repose. No brilliant light mars the pervading softness of the
atmosphere; no violent colour materialises the light, ethereal hues of
the dresses; no sudden noises interrupt the fitful and plaintive notes
of the lute, jar with the soft twittering of the birds in the aviaries,
or drown the still, regular melody of the ladies' voices.  All objects,
animate and inanimate, are in harmony with each other.  It is a scene
of spiritualised indolence--a picture of dreamy beatitude in the inmost
sanctuary of unruffled repose.

Amid this assemblage of beauty and nobility, the members of which were
rather to be generally noticed than particularly observed, there was,
however, one individual who, both by the solitary occupation he had
chosen and his accidental position in the room, was personally
remarkable among the listless patricians around him.

His couch was placed nearer the window than that of any other occupant
of the chamber. Some of his indolent neighbours--especially those of
the gentler sex--occasionally regarded him with mingled looks of
admiration and curiosity; but no one approached him, or attempted to
engage him in conversation.  A piece of vellum lay by his side, on
which, from time to time, he traced a few words, and then resumed his
reclining position, apparently absorbed in reflection, and utterly
regardless of all the occupants, male and female, of the imperial
apartment.  Judging from his general appearance, he could scarcely be
twenty-five years of age.  The conformation of the upper part of his
face was thoroughly intellectual--the forehead high, broad, and
upright; the eyes clear, penetrating, and thoughtful;--but the lower
part was, on the other hand, undeniably sensual.  The lips, full and
thick, formed a disagreeable contrast to the delicate chiselling of the
straight Grecian nose; while the fleshiness of the chin, and the jovial
redundancy of the cheeks, were, in their turn, utterly at variance with
the character of the pale, noble forehead, and the expression of the
quick, intelligent eyes.  In stature he was barely of the middle size;
but every part of his body was so perfectly proportioned that he
appeared, in any position, taller than he really was.  The upper part
of his dress, thrown open from the heat, partly disclosed the fine
statuesque formation of his neck and chest. His ears, hands, and feet
were of that smallness and delicacy which is held to denote the
aristocracy of birth; and there was in his manner that indescribable
combination of unobtrusive dignity and unaffected elegance, which in
all ages and countries, and through all changes of manners and customs,
has rendered the demeanour of its few favoured possessors the
instantaneous interpreter of their social rank.


While the patrician was still occupied over his vellum, the following
conversation took place in whispers between two ladies placed near the
situation he occupied.

'Tell me, Camilla,' said the eldest and stateliest of the two, 'who is
the courtier so occupied in composition?  I have endeavoured, I know
not how often, to catch his eye; but the man will look at nothing but
his roll of vellum or the corners of the room.'

'What, are you so great a stranger in Italy as not to know him!'
replied the other, a lively girl of small delicate form, who fidgeted
with persevering restlessness on her couch, and seemed incapable of
giving an instant's steady attention to any of the objects around her.
'By all the saints, martyrs, and relics of my uncle the bishop!'

'Hush!  You should not swear!'

'Not swear!  Why, I am making a new collection of oaths, intended
solely for ladies' use!  I intend to set the fashion of swearing by
them myself!'

'But answer my question, I beseech you!  Will you never learn to talk
on one subject at a time?'

'Your question--ah, your question!  It was about the Goths?'

'No, no!  It was about that man who is incessantly writing, and will
look at nobody.  He is almost as provoking as Camilla herself!'

'Don't frown so!  That man, as you call him, is the senator Vetranio.'

The lady started.  It was evident that Vetranio had a reputation.

'Yes!' continued the lively Camilla, 'that is the accomplished
Vetranio; but he will be no favourite of yours, for he sometimes
swears--swears by the ancient gods, too, which is forbidden!'

'He is handsome.'

'Handsome! he is beautiful!  Not a woman in Italy but is languishing
for him!'

'I have heard that he is clever.'

'Who has not?  He is the author of some of the most celebrated sauces
of the age.  Cooks of all nations worship him as an oracle.  Then he
writes poetry, and composes music, and paints pictures!  And as for
philosophy--he talks it better than my uncle the bishop!'

'Is he rich?'

'Ah! my uncle the bishop!--I must tell you how I helped Vetranio to
make a satire on him! When I was staying with him at Rome, I used often
to see a woman in a veil taken across the garden to his study; so, to
perplex him, I asked him who she was.  And he frowned and stammered,
and said at first that I was disrespectful; but he told me afterwards
that she was an Arian whom he was labouring to convert.  So I thought I
should like to see how this conversion went on, and I hid myself behind
a bookcase.  But it is a profound secret; I tell it you in confidence.'

'I don't care to know it.  Tell me about Vetranio.'

'How ill-natured you are!  Oh! I shall never forget how we laughed when
I told Vetranio what I had seen.  He took up his writing materials, and
made the satire immediately.  The next day all Rome heard of it.  My
uncle was speechless with rage!  I believe he suspected me; but he gave
up converting the Arian lady, and--'

'I ask you again--Is Vetranio rich?'


'Half Sicily is his.  He has immense estates in Africa, olive-grounds
in Syria, and corn-fields in Gaul.  I was present at an entertainment
he gave at his villa in Sicily.  He fitted up one of his vessels from
the descriptions of the furnishing of Cleopatra's galley, and made his
slaves swim after us as attendant Tritons.  Oh! it was magnificent!'

'I should like to know him.'

'You should see his cats!  He has a perfect legion of them at his
villa. Twelve slaves are employed to attend on them.  He is mad about
cats, and declares that the old Egyptians were right to worship them.
He told me yesterday, that when his largest cat is dead he will
canonise her, in spite of the Christians!  And then he is so kind to
his slaves!  They are never whipped or punished, except when they
neglect or disfigure themselves; for Vetranio will allow nothing that
is ugly or dirty to come near him.  You must visit his banqueting-hall
in Rome.  It is perfection!'

'But why is he here?'

'He has come to Ravenna, charged with some secret message from the
Senate, and has presented a rare breed of chickens to that foolish--'

'Hush! you may be overheard!'

'Well!--to that wise emperor of ours!  Ah! the palace has been so
pleasant since he has been here!'

At this instant the above dialogue--from the frivolity of which the
universally-learned readers of modern times will, we fear, recoil with
contempt--was interrupted by a movement on the part of its hero which
showed that his occupation was at an end.  With the elaborate
deliberation of a man who disdains to exhibit himself as liable to be
hurried by any mortal affair, Vetranio slowly folded up the vellum he
had now filled with writing, and depositing it in his bosom, made a
sign to a slave who happened to be then passing near him with a dish of
fruit.

Having received his message, the slave retired to the entrance of the
apartment, and beckoning to a man who stood outside the door, motioned
him to approach Vetranio's couch.

This individual immediately hurried across the room to the window where
the elegant Roman awaited him.  Not the slightest description of him is
needed; for he belonged to a class with which moderns are as well
acquainted as ancients--a class which has survived all changes of
nations and manners--a class which came in with the first rich man in
the world, and will only go out with the last.  In a word, he was a
parasite.

He enjoyed, however, one great superiority over his modern successors:
in his day flattery was a profession--in ours it has sunk to a pursuit.

'I shall leave Ravenna this evening,' said Vetranio.

The parasite made three low bows and smiled ecstatically.

'You will order my travelling equipage to be at the palace gates an
hour before sunset.'

The parasite declared he should never forget the honour of the
commission, and left the room.

The sprightly Camilla, who had overheard Vetranio's command, jumped off
her couch, as soon as the parasite's back was turned, and running up to
the senator, began to reproach him for the determination he had just
formed.

'Have you no compunction at leaving me to the dulness of this horrible
palace, to satisfy your idle fancy for going to Rome,' said she,
pouting her pretty lip, and playing with a lock of the dark brown hair
that clustered over Vetranio's brow.


'Has the senator Vetranio so little regard for his friends as to leave
them to the mercy of the Goths?' said another lady, advancing with a
winning smile to Camilla's side.

'Ah, those Goths!' exclaimed Vetranio, turning to the last speaker.
'Tell me, Julia, is it not reported that the barbarians are really
marching into Italy?'

'Everybody has heard of it.  The emperor is so discomposed by the
rumour, that he has forbidden the very name of the Goths to be
mentioned in his presence again.'

'For my part,' continued Vetranio, drawing Camilla towards him, and
playfully tapping her little dimpled hand, 'I am in anxious expectation
of the Goths, for I have designed a statue of Minerva, for which I can
find no model so fit as a woman of that troublesome nation.  I am
informed upon good authority, that their limbs are colossal, and their
sense of propriety most obediently pliable under the discipline of the
purse.'

'If the Goths supply you with a model for anything,' said a courtier
who had joined the group while Vetranio was speaking, 'it will be with
a representation of the burning of your palace at Rome, which they will
enable you to paint from the inexhaustible reservoir of your own
wounds.'

The individual who uttered this last observation was remarkable among
the brilliant circle around him by his excessive ugliness.  Urged by
his personal disadvantages, and the loss of all his property at the
gaming-table, he had latterly personated a character, the
accomplishments attached to which rescued him, by their disagreeable
originality in that frivolous age, from oblivion or contempt.  He was a
Cynic philosopher.

His remark, however, produced no other effect on his hearers' serenity
than to excite their merriment.  Vetranio laughed, Camilla laughed,
Julia laughed.  The idea of a troop of barbarians ever being able to
burn a palace at Rome was too wildly ridiculous for any one's gravity;
and as the speech was repeated in other parts of the room, in spite of
their dulness and lassitude the whole Court laughed.

'I know not why I should be amused by that man's nonsense,' said
Camilla, suddenly becoming grave at the very crisis of a most
attractive smile, 'when I am so melancholy at the thought of Vetranio's
departure. What will become of me when he is gone?  Alas! who will be
left in the palace to compose songs to my beauty and music for my lute?
Who will paint me as Venus, and tell me stories about the ancient
Egyptians and their cats?  Who at the banquet will direct what dishes I
am to choose, and what I am to reject?  Who?'--and poor little Camilla
stopped suddenly in her enumeration of the pleasures she was about to
lose, and seemed on the point of weeping as piteously as she had been
laughing rapturously but the instant before.

Vetranio was touched--not by the compliment to his more intellectual
powers, but by the admission of his convivial supremacy as a guide to
the banquet, contained in the latter part of Camilla's remonstrance.
The sex were then, as now, culpably deficient in gastronomic
enthusiasm. It was, therefore, a perfect triumph to have made a convert
to the science of the youngest and loveliest of the ladies of the Court.

'If she can gain leave of absence,' said the gratified senator,
'Camilla shall accompany me to Rome, and shall be present at the first
celebration of my recent discovery of a Nightingale Sauce.'

Camilla was in ecstasies.  She seized Vetranio's cheeks between her
rosy little fingers, kissed him as enthusiastically as a child kisses a
new toy, and darted gaily off to prepare for her departure.


'Vetranio would be better employed,' sneered the Cynic, 'in inventing
new salves for future wounds than new sauces for future nightingales!
His carcase will be carved by Gothic swords as a feast for the worms
before his birds are spitted with Roman skewers as a feast for his
guests!  Is this a time for cutting statues and concocting sauces?  Fie
on the senators who abandon themselves to such pursuits as Vetranio's!'

'I have other designs,' replied the object of all this moral
indignation, looking with insulting indifference on the Cynic's
repulsive countenance, 'which, from their immense importance to the
world, must meet with universal approval.  The labour that I have just
achieved forms one of a series of three projects which I have for some
time held in contemplation.  The first is an analysis of the new
priesthood; the second, a true personification, both by painting and
sculpture, of Venus; the third, a discovery of what has been hitherto
uninvented--a nightingale sauce.  By the inscrutable wisdom of Fate, it
has been so willed that the last of the objects I proposed to myself
has been the first attained.  The sauce is composed, and I have just
concluded on this vellum the ode that is to introduce it at my table.
The analysation will be my next labour.  It will take the form of a
treatise, in which, making the experience of past years the groundwork
of prophecy for the future, I shall show the precise number of
additional dissensions, controversies, and quarrels that will be
required to enable the new priesthood to be themselves the destroyers
of their own worship.  I shall ascertain by an exact computation the
year in which this destruction will be consummated; and I have by me as
the materials for my work an historical summary of Christian schisms
and disputes in Rome for the last hundred years.  As for my second
design, the personification of Venus, it is of appalling difficulty.
It demands an investigation of the women of every nation under the sun;
a comparison of the relative excellences and peculiarities of their
several charms; and a combination of all that is loveliest in the
infinite variety of their most prominent attractions, under one form.
To forward the execution of this arduous project, my tenants at home
and my slave-merchants abroad have orders to send to my villa in Sicily
all women who are born most beautiful in the Empire, or can be brought
most beautiful from the nations around.  I will have them displayed
before me, of every shade in complexion and of every peculiarity in
form!  At the fitting period I shall commence my investigations,
undismayed by difficulty, and determined on success.  Never yet has the
true Venus been personified!  Should I accomplish the task, how
exquisite will be my triumph!  My work will be the altar at which
thousands will offer up the softest emotions of the heart.  It will
free the prisoned imagination of youth, and freshen the fading
recollections on the memory of age!'

Vetranio paused.  The Cynic was struck dumb with indignation.  A
solitary zealot for the Church, who happened to be by, frowned at the
analysation.  The ladies tittered at the personification.  The
gastronomists chuckled at the nightingale sauce; but for the first few
minutes no one spoke.  During this temporary embarrassment, Vetranio
whispered a few words in Julia's ear; and--just as the Cynic was
sufficiently recovered to retort--accompanied by the lady, he quitted
the room.

Never was popularity more unalloyed than Vetranio's.  Gifted with a
disposition the pliability of which adapted itself to all emergencies,
his generosity disarmed enemies, while his affability made friends.
Munificent without assumption, successful without pride, he obliged
with grace and shone with safety.  People enjoyed his hospitality, for
they knew that it was disinterested; and admired his acquirements, for
they felt that they were unobtrusive.  Sometimes (as in his dialogue
with the Cynic) the whim of the moment, or the sting of a sarcasm, drew
from him a hint at his station, or a display of his eccentricities;
but, as he was always the first soon afterwards to lead the laugh at
his own outbreak, his credit as a noble suffered nothing by his
infirmity as a man.  Gaily and attractively he moved in all grades of
the society of his age, winning his social laurels in every rank,
without making a rival to dispute their possession, or an enemy to
detract from their value.


On quitting the Court waiting-room, Vetranio and Julia descended the
palace stairs and passed into the emperor's garden.  Used generally as
an evening lounge, this place was now untenanted, save by the few
attendants engaged in cultivating the flower-beds and watering the
smooth, shady lawns.  Entering one of the most retired of the numerous
summer-houses among the trees, Vetranio motioned his companion to take
a seat, and then abruptly addressed her in the following words:--

'I have heard that you are about to depart for Rome--is it true?'

He asked this question in a low voice, and with a manner in its
earnestness strangely at variance with the volatile gaiety which had
characterised him, but a few moments before, among the nobles of the
Court.  As Julia answered him in the affirmative, his countenance
expressed a lively satisfaction; and seating himself by her side, he
continued the conversation thus:--

'If I thought that you intended to stay for any length of time in the
city, I should venture upon a fresh extortion from your friendship by
asking you to lend me your little villa at Aricia!'

'You shall take with you to Rome an order on my steward to place
everything there at your entire disposal.'

'My generous Julia!  You are of the gifted few who really know how to
confer a favour!  Another woman would have asked me why I wanted the
villa--you give it unreservedly.  So delicate an unwillingness to
intrude on a secret reminds me that the secret should now be yours!'

To explain the easy confidence that existed between Vetranio and Julia,
it is necessary to inform the reader that the lady--although still
attractive in appearance--was of an age to muse on her past, rather
than to meditate on her future conquests.  She had known her eccentric
companion from his boyhood, had been once flattered in his verses, and
was sensible enough--now that her charms were on the wane--to be as
content with the friendship of the senator as she had formerly been
enraptured with the adoration of the youth.

'You are too penetrating,' resumed Vetranio, after a short pause, 'not
to have already suspected that I only require your villa to assist me
in the concealment of an intrigue.  So peculiar is my adventure in its
different circumstances, that to make use of my palace as the scene of
its development would be to risk a discovery which might produce the
immediate subversion of all my designs.  But I fear the length of my
confession will exceed the duration of your patience!'

'You have aroused my curiosity.  I could listen to you for ever!'

'A short time before I took my departure from Rome for this place,'
continued Vetranio, 'I encountered an adventure of the most
extraordinary nature, which has haunted me with the most extraordinary
perseverance, and which will have, I feel assured, the most
extraordinary results.  I was sitting one evening in the garden of my
palace on the Pincian Mount, occupied in trying a new composition on my
lute.  In one of the pauses of the melody, which was tender and
plaintive, I heard sounds that resembled the sobbing of some one in
distress among the trees behind me.  I looked cautiously round, and
discerned, half-hidden by the verdure, the figure of a young girl, who
appeared to be listening to the music with the most entranced
attention. Flattered by such a testimony to my skill, and anxious to
gain a nearer view of my mysterious visitant, I advanced towards her
hiding-place, forgetting in my haste to continue playing on the lute.
The instant the music ceased, she discerned me and disappeared.
Determined to behold her, I again struck the chords, and in a few
minutes I saw her white robe once more among the trees.  I redoubled my
efforts.  I played with the utmost expression the most pathetic parts
of the melody.  As if under the influence of a charm, she began to
advance towards me, now hesitating, now moving back a few steps, now
approaching, half-reluctantly, half willingly, until, utterly
vanquished by the long trembling close of the last cadence of the air,
she ran suddenly up to me, and falling at my feet, raised her hands as
if to implore my pardon.'

'Truly this was no common tribute to your skill!  Did she speak to you?'


'She uttered not a word,' continued Vetranio.  'Her large soft eyes,
bright with tears, looked piteously up in my face; her delicate lips
trembled, as if she wished to speak, but dared not; her smooth round
arms were the very perfection of beauty.  Child as she seemed in years
and emotions, she looked a woman in loveliness and form.  For the
moment I was too much astonished by the suddenness of her supplicating
action to move or speak.  As soon as I recovered myself I attempted to
fondle and console her, but she shrunk from my embrace, and seemed
inclined to escape from me again; until I touched once more the strings
of the lute, and then she uttered a subdued exclamation of delight,
nestled close up to me, and looked into my face with such a strange
expression of mingled adoration and rapture, that I declare to you,
Julia, I felt as bashful before her as a boy.'

'You bashful!  The Senator Vetranio bashful!' exclaimed Julia, looking
up with an expression of the most unfeigned incredulity and
astonishment.

'The lute,' pursued Vetranio gravely, without heeding the interruption,
'was my sole means of procuring any communication with her.  If I
ceased playing, we were as strangers; if I resumed, we were as friends.
So, subduing the notes of the instrument while she spoke to me in a
soft tremulous musical voice, I still continued to play.  By this plan
I discovered at our first interview that she was the daughter of one
Numerian, that she was on the point of completing her fourteenth year,
and that she was called Antonina.  I had only succeeded in gaining this
mere outline of her story, when, as if struck by some sudden
apprehension, she tore herself from me with a look of the utmost
terror, and entreating me not to follow her if I ever desired to see
her again, she disappeared rapidly among the trees.'

'More and more wonderful!  And, in your new character of a bashful man,
you doubtless obeyed her injunctions?'

'I did,' replied the senator; 'but the next evening I revisited the
garden grove, and, as soon as I struck the chords, as if by magic, she
again approached.  At this second interview I learned the reason of her
mysterious appearances and departures.  Her father, she told me, was
one of a new sect, who imagine--with what reason it is impossible to
comprehend--that they recommend themselves to their Deity by making
their lives one perpetual round of bodily suffering and mental anguish.
Not content with distorting all his own feelings and faculties, this
tyrant perpetrated his insane austerities upon the poor child as well.
He forbade her to enter a theatre, to look on sculpture, to read
poetry, to listen to music.  He made her learn long prayers, and attend
to interminable sermons.  He allowed her no companions of her own
age--not even girls like herself.  The only recreation that she could
obtain was the permission--granted with much reluctance and many
rebukes--to cultivate a little garden which belonged to the house they
lived in, and joined at one point the groves round my palace.  There,
while she was engaged over her flowers, she first heard the sound of my
lute for many months before I had discovered her, she had been in the
habit of climbing the enclosure that bounded her garden, and hiding
herself among the trees to listen to the music, whenever her father's
concerns took him abroad.  She had been discovered in this occupation
by an old man appointed to watch her in his master's absence.  The
attendant, however, on hearing her confession, not only promised to
keep her secret, but permitted her to continue her visits to my grove
whenever I chanced to be playing there on the lute.  Now the most
mysterious part of this matter is, that the girl seemed--in spite of
his severity towards her--to have a great affection for her surly; for,
when I offered to deliver her from his custody, she declared that
nothing could induce her to desert him--not even the attraction of
living among fine pictures and hearing beautiful music every hour in
the day.  But I see I weary you; and, indeed, it is evident from the
length of the shadows that the hour of my departure is at hand.  Let me
then pass from my introductory interviews with Antonina, to the
consequences that had resulted from them when I set forth on my journey
to Ravenna.'

'I think I can imagine the consequences already!'  said Julia, smiling
maliciously.


'Begin then,' retorted Vetranio, 'by imagining that the strangeness of
this girl's situation, and the originality of her ideas, invested her
with an attraction for me, which the charms of her person and age
contributed immensely to heighten.  She delighted my faculties as a
poet, as much as she fired my feelings as a man; and I determined to
lure her from the tyrannical protection of her father by the employment
of every artifice that my ingenuity could suggest. I began by teaching
her to exercise for herself the talent which had so attracted her in
another. By the familiarity engendered on both sides by such an
occupation, I hoped to gain as much in affection from her as she
acquired in skill from me; but to my astonishment, I still found her as
indifferent towards the master, and as tender towards the music, as she
had appeared at our first interview.  If she had repelled my advances,
if they had overwhelmed her with confusion, I could have adapted myself
to her humour, I should have felt the encouragement of hope; but the
coldness, the carelessness, the unnatural, incomprehensible ease with
which she received even my caresses, utterly disconcerted me.  It
seemed as if she could only regard me as a moving statue, as a mere
impersonation, immaterial as the science I was teaching her. If I
spoke, she hardly looked on me; if I moved, she scarcely noticed the
action.  I could not consider it dislike; she seemed to gentle to
nourish such a feeling for any creature on earth.  I could not believe
it coldness; she was all life, all agitation, if she heard only a few
notes of music. When she touched the chords of the instrument, her
whole frame trembled. Her eyes, mild, serious, and thoughtful when she
looked on me, now brightened with delight, now softened with tears,
when she listened to the lute.  As day by day her skill in music
increased, so her manner towards me grew more inexplicably indifferent.
At length, weary of the constant disappointments that I experienced,
and determined to make a last effort to touch her heart by awakening
her gratitude, I presented her with the very lute which she had at
first heard, and on which she had now learned to play.  Never have I
seen any human being so rapturously delighted as this incomprehensible
girl when she received the instrument from my hands.  She alternately
wept and laughed over it, she kissed it, fondled it, spoke to it, as if
it had been a living thing.  But when I approached to suppress the
expressions of thankfulness that she poured on me for the gift, she
suddenly hid the lute in her robe, as if afraid that I should deprive
her of it, and hurried rapidly from my sight.  The next day I waited
for her at our accustomed meeting-place, but she never appeared.  I
sent a slave to her father's house, but she would hold no communication
with him.  It was evident that, now she had gained her end, she cared
no more to behold me.  In my first moments of irritation, I determined
to make her feel my power, if she despised my kindness; but reflection
convinced me, from my acquaintance with her character, that in such a
matter force was impolitic, that I should risk my popularity in Rome,
and engage myself in an unworthy quarrel to no purpose.  Dissatisfied
with myself, and disappointed in the girl, I obeyed the first dictates
of my impatience, and seizing the opportunity afforded by my duties in
the senate of escaping from the scene of defeated hopes, I departed
angrily for Ravenna.'

'Departed for Ravenna!' cried Julia, laughing outright.  'Oh, what a
conclusion to the adventure! I confess it, Vetranio, such consequences
as these are beyond all imagination!'

'You laugh, Julia,' returned the senator, a little piqued; 'but hear me
to the end, and you will find that I have not yet resigned myself to
defeat.  For the few days that I have remained here, Antonina's image
has incessantly troubled my thoughts.  I perceive that my inclination,
as well as my reputation, is concerned in subduing her ungrateful
aversion.  I suspect that my anxiety to gain her will, if unremoved, so
far influence my character, that from Vetranio the Serene, I shall be
changed into Vetranio the Sardonic.  Pride, honour, curiosity, and love
all urge me to her conquest.  To prepare for my banquet is an excuse to
the Court for my sudden departure from this place; the real object of
my journey is Antonina alone.'

'Ah, now I recognise my friend again in his own character,' remarked
the lady approvingly.


'You will ask me how I purpose to obtain another interview with her?'
continued Vetranio. 'I answer, that the girl's attendant has
voluntarily offered himself as an instrument for the prosecution of my
plans.  The very day before I departed from Rome, he suddenly presented
himself to my in my garden, and proposed to introduce me into
Numerian's house--having first demanded, with the air more of an equal
than an inferior, whether the report that I was still a secret adherent
of the old religion, of the worship of the gods, was true.  Suspicious
of the fellow's motives (for he abjured all recompense as the reward of
his treachery), and irritated by the girl's recent ingratitude, I
treated his offer with contempt.  Now, however, that my dissatisfaction
is calmed and my anxiety aroused, I am determined, at all hazards, to
trust myself to this man, be his motives for aiding me what they may.
If my efforts at my expected interview--and I will not spare them--are
rewarded with success, it will be necessary to obtain some refuge for
Antonina that will neither be suspected nor searched.  For such a
hiding-place, nothing can be more admirably adapted than your Arician
villa.  Do you--now that you know for what use it is intended--repent
of your generous disposal of it in aid of my design?'

'I am delighted to have had it to bestow on you,' replied the liberal
Julia, pressing Vetranio's hand.  'Your adventure is indeed uncommon--I
burn with impatience to hear how it will end. Whatever happens, you may
depend on my secrecy and count on my assistance.  But see, the sun is
already verging towards the west; and yonder comes one of your slaves
to inform you, I doubt not, that your equipage is prepared.  Return
with me to the palace, and I will supply you with the letter necessary
to introduce you as master to my country abode.'

      *      *      *      *      *

The worthy citizens of Ravenna assembled in the square before the
palace to behold the senator's departure, had entirely exhausted such
innocent materials for amusement as consisted in staring at the guards,
catching the clouds of gnats that hovered about their ears, and
quarrelling with each other; and were now reduced to a state of very
noisy and unanimous impatience, when their discontent was suddenly and
most effectually appeased by the appearance of the travelling equipage
with Vetranio and Camilla outside the palace gates.

Uproarious shouts greeted the appearance of the senator and his
magnificent retinue; but they were increased a hundred-fold when the
chief slaves, by their master's command, each scattered a handful of
small coin among the poorer classes of the spectators.  Every man among
that heterogeneous assemblage of rogues, fools, and idlers roared his
loudest and capered his highest, in honour of the generous patrician.
Gradually and carefully the illustrious travellers moved through the
crowd around them to the city gate; and thence, amid incessant shouts
of applause, raised with imposing unanimity of lung, and wrought up to
the most distracting discordancy of noise, Vetranio and his lively
companion departed in triumph for Rome.

      *      *      *      *      *

A few days after this event the citizens were again assembled at the
same place and hour--probably to witness another patrician
departure--when their ears were assailed by the unexpected sound
produced by the call to arms, which was followed immediately by the
closing of the city gates.  They had scarcely asked each other the
meaning of these unusual occurrences, when a peasant, half frantic with
terror, rushed into the square, shouting out the terrible intelligence
that the Goths were in sight!

The courtiers heard the news, and starting from a luxurious repast,
hurried to the palace windows to behold the portentous spectacle.  For
the remainder of the evening the banqueting tables were unapproached by
the guests.


The wretched emperor was surprised among his poultry by that dreaded
intelligence.  He, too, hastened to the windows, and looking forth, saw
the army of avengers passing in contempt his solitary fortress, and
moving swiftly onward towards defenceless Rome.  Long after the
darkness had hidden the masses of that mighty multitude from his eyes,
did he remain staring helplessly upon the fading landscape, in a stupor
of astonishment and dread; and, for the first time since he had
possessed them, his flocks of fowls were left for that night unattended
by their master's hand.



CHAPTER 3.

ROME.

The perusal of the title to this chapter will, we fear, excite emotions
of apprehension, rather than of curiosity, in the breasts of
experienced readers.  They will doubtless imagine that it is portentous
of long rhapsodies on those wonders of antiquity, the description of
which has long become absolutely nauseous to them by incessant
iteration.  They will foresee wailings over the Palace of the Caesars,
and meditations among the arches of the Colosseum, loading a long
series of weary paragraphs to the very chapter's end; and,
considerately anxious to spare their attention a task from which it
recoils, they will unanimously hurry past the dreaded desert of
conventional reflection, to alight on the first oasis that may present
itself, whether it be formed by a new division of the story, or
suddenly indicated by the appearance of a dialogue. Animated,
therefore, by apprehensions such as these, we hasten to assure them
that in no instance will the localities of our story trench upon the
limits of the well-worn Forum, or mount the arches of the exhausted
Colosseum.  It is with the beings, and not the buildings of old Rome,
that their attention is to be occupied.  We desire to present them with
a picture of the inmost emotions of the times--of the living, breathing
actions and passions of the people of the doomed Empire.  Antiquarian
topography and classical architecture we leave to abler pens, and
resign to other readers.

It is, however, necessary that the sphere in which the personages of
our story are about to act should be in some measure indicated, in
order to facilitate the comprehension of their respective movements.
That portion of the extinct city which we design to revive has left few
traces of its existence in the modern town.  Its sites are
traditionary--its buildings are dust. The church rises where the temple
once stood, and the wine-shop now lures the passing idler where the
bath invited his ancestor of old.

The walls of Rome are in extent, at the present day, the same as they
were at the period of which we now write.  But here all analogy between
the ancient and modern city ends.  The houses that those walls were
once scarcely wide enough to enclose have long since vanished, and
their modern successors occupy but a third of the space once allotted
to the capital of the Empire.

Beyond the walls immense suburbs stretched forth in the days of old.
Gorgeous villas, luxurious groves, temples, theatres,
baths--interspersed by colonies of dwellings belonging to the lower
orders of the people--surrounded the mighty city.  Of these innumerable
abodes hardly a trace remains.  The modern traveller, as he looks forth
over the site of the famous suburbs, beholds, here and there, a ruined
aqueduct, or a crumbling tomb, tottering on the surface of a
pestilential marsh.

The present entrance to Rome by the Porta del Popolo occupies the same
site as the ancient Flaminian Gate.  Three great streets now lead from
it towards the southern extremity of the city, and form with their
tributaries the principal portion of modern Rome.  On one side they are
bounded by the Pincian Hill, on the other by the Tiber.  Of these
streets, those nearest the river occupy the position of the famous
Campus Martius; those on the other side, the ancient approaches to the
gardens of Sallust and Lucullus, on the Pincian Mount.

On the opposite bank of the Tiber (gained by the Ponte St. Angelo,
formerly the Pons Elius), two streets pierced through an irregular and
populous neighbourhood, conduct to the modern Church of St. Peter.  At
the period of our story this part of the city was of much greater
consequence, both in size and appearance, than it is at present, and
led directly to the ancient Basilica of St. Peter, which stood on the
same site as that now occupied by the modern edifice.


The events about to be narrated occur entirely in the parts of the city
just described.  From the Pincian Hill, across the Campus Martius, over
the Pons Elius, and on to the Basilica of St. Peter, the reader may be
often invited to accompany us, but he will be spared all necessity of
penetrating familiar ruins, or mourning over the sepulchres of departed
patriots.

Ere, however, we revert to former actors or proceed to new characters,
it will be requisite to people the streets that we here attempt to
rebuild.  By this process it is hoped that the reader will gain that
familiarity with the manners and customs of the Romans of the fifth
century on which the influence of this story mainly depends, and which
we despair of being able to instil by a philosophical disquisition on
the features of the age.  A few pages of illustration will serve our
purpose better, perhaps, than volumes of historical description.  There
is no more unerring index to the character of a people than the streets
of their cities.

It is near evening.  In the widest part of the Campus Martius crowds of
people are assembled before the gates of a palace.  They are
congregated to receive several baskets of provisions, distributed with
ostentatious charity by the owner of the mansion.  The incessant
clamour and agitation of the impatient multitude form a strange
contrast to the stately serenity of the natural and artificial objects
by which they are enclosed on all sides.

The space they occupy is oblong in shape and of great extent in size.
Part of it is formed by a turf walk shaded with trees, part by the
paved approaches to the palace and the public baths which stand in its
immediate neighbourhood.  These two edifices are remarkable by their
magnificent outward adornments of statues, and the elegance and number
of the flights of steps by which they are respectively entered.  With
the inferior buildings, the market-places and the gardens attached to
them, they are sufficiently extensive to form the boundary of one side
of the immediate view.  The appearance of monotony which might at other
times be remarked in the vastness and regularity of their white fronts,
is at this moment agreeably broken by several gaily-coloured awnings
stretched over their doors and balconies.  The sun is now shining on
them with overpowering brightness; the metallic ornaments on their
windows glitter like gems of fire; even the trees which form their
groves partake of the universal flow of light, and fail, like the
objects around them, to offer to the weary eye either refreshment or
repose.

Towards the north, the Mausoleum of Augustus, towering proudly up into
the brilliant sky, at once attracts the attention.  From its position,
parts of this noble building are already in shade. Not a human being is
visible on any part of its mighty galleries--it stands solitary and
sublime, an impressive embodiment of the emotions which it was raised
to represent.

On the side opposite the palace and the baths is the turf walk already
mentioned.  Trees, thickly planted and interlaced by vines, cast a
luxurious shade over this spot.  In their interstices, viewed from a
distance, appear glimpses of gay dresses, groups of figures in repose,
stands loaded with fruit and flowers, and innumerable white marble
statues of fauns and wood-nymphs.  From this delicious retreat the
rippling of fountains is to be heard, occasionally interrupted by the
rustling of leaves, or the plaintive cadences of the Roman flute.


Southward two pagan temples stand in lonely grandeur among a host of
monuments and trophies.  The symmetry of their first construction still
remains unimpaired, their white marble pillars shine in the sunlight
brightly as of old, yet they now present to the eye an aspect of
strange desolation, of unnatural mysterious gloom.  Although the laws
forbid the worship for which they were built, the hand of reform has as
yet not ventured to doom them to ruin or adapt them to Christian
purposes.  None venture to tread their once-crowded colonnades.  No
priest appears to give the oracles from their doors; no sacrifices reek
upon their naked altars. Under their roofs, visited only by the light
that steals through their narrow entrances, stand unnoticed,
unworshipped, unmoved, the mighty idols of old Rome.  Human emotion,
which made them Omnipotence once, has left them but stone now.  The
'Star in the East' has already dimmed the fearful halo which the
devotion of bloodshed once wreathed round their forms. Forsaken and
alone, they stand but as the gloomy monuments of the greatest delusion
ever organised by the ingenuity of man.

We have now, so to express it, exhibited the frame surrounding the
moving picture, which we shall next attempt to present to the reader by
mixing with the multitude before the palace gates.

This assembly resolved itself into three divisions:  that collected
before the palace steps, that loitering about the public baths, and
that reposing in the shade of the groves.  The first was of the most
consequence in numbers, and of the greatest variety in appearance.
Composed of rogues of the worst order from every quarter of the world,
it might be said to present, in its general aspect of numerical
importance, the very sublime of degradation.  Confident in their rude
union of common avidity, these worthy citizens vented their insolence
on all objects, and in every direction, with a careless impartiality
which would have shamed the most victorious efforts of modern mobs.
The hubbub of voices was perfectly fearful.  The coarse execrations of
drunken Gauls, the licentious witticisms of effeminate Greeks, the
noisy satisfaction of native Romans, the clamorous indignation of
irritable Jews--all sounded together in one incessant chorus of
discordant noises. Nor were the senses of sight and smell more
agreeably assailed than the faculty of hearing, by this anomalous
congregation.  Immodest youth and irreverent age; woman savage, man
cowardly; the swarthy Ethiopian beslabbered with stinking oil; the
stolid Briton begrimed with dirt--these, and a hundred other varying
combinations, to be imagined rather than expressed, met the attention
in every direction.  To describe the odours exhaled by the heat from
this seething mixture of many pollutions, would be to force the reader
to close the book; we prefer to return to the distribution which was
the cause of this degrading tumult, and which consisted of small
baskets of roasted meat packed with common fruits and vegetables, and
handed, or rather flung down, to the mob by the servants of the
nobleman who gave the feast.  The people revelled in the abundance thus
presented to them. They threw themselves upon it like wild beasts; they
devoured it like hogs, or bore it off like plunderers; while, secure in
the eminence on which they were placed, the purveyors of this public
banquet expressed their contempt for its noisy recipients, by holding
their noses, stopping their ears, turning their backs, and other
pantomimic demonstrations of lofty and excessive disgust.  These
actions did not escape the attention of those members of the assembly
who, having eaten their fill, were at leisure to make use of their
tongues, and who showered an incessant storm of abuse on the heads of
their benefactor's retainers.

'See those fellows!' cried one; 'they are the waiters at our feast, and
they mock us to our faces! Down with the filthy kitchen thieves!'

'Excellently well said, Davus!--but who is to approach them?  They
stink at this distance!'

'The rotten-bodied knaves have the noses of dogs and the carcases of
goats.'

Then came a chorus of voices--'Down with them!  Down with them!'  In
the midst of which an indignant freedman advanced to rebuke the mob,
receiving, as the reward of his temerity, a shower of missiles and a
volley of curses; after which he was thus addressed by a huge, greasy
butcher, hoisted on his companions' shoulders:--

'By the soul of the emperor, could I get near you, you rogue, I would
quarter you with my fingers alone!--A grinning scoundrel that jeers at
others!  A filthy flatterer that dirts the very ground he walks on!  By
the blood of the martyrs, should I fling the sweepings of the
slaughter-house at him, he knows not where to get himself dried!'


'Thou rag of a man,' roared a neighbour of the indignant butcher's,
'dost thou frown upon the guests of thy master, the very scrapings of
whose skin are worth more than thy whole carcase! It is easier to make
a drinking-vessel of the skull of a flea than to make an honest man of
such a villainous night-walker as thou art!'

'Health and prosperity to our noble entertainer!' shouted one section
of the grateful crowd as the last speaker paused for breath.

'Death to all knaves of parasites!'  chimed in another.

'Honour to the citizens of Rome!' roared a third party with modest
enthusiasm.

'Give that freedman our bones to pick!' screamed an urchin from the
outskirts of the crowd.

This ingenious piece of advice was immediately followed; and the
populace gave vent to a shout of triumph as the unfortunate freedman,
scared by a new volley of missiles, retreated with ignominious
expedition to the shelter of his patron's halls.

In the slight and purified specimen of the 'table talk' of a Roman mob
which we have here ventured to exhibit, the reader will perceive that
extraordinary mixture of servility and insolence which characterised
not only the conversation but the actions of the lower orders of
society at the period of which we write.  Oppressed and degraded, on
the one hand, to a point of misery scarcely conceivable to the public
of the present day, the poorer classes in Rome were, on the other,
invested with such a degree of moral license, and permitted such an
extent of political privilege, as flattered their vanity into blinding
their sense of indignation. Slaves in their season of servitude,
masters in their hours of recreation, they presented, as a class, one
of the most amazing social anomalies ever existing in any nation; and
formed, in their dangerous and artificial position, one of the most
important of the internal causes of the downfall of Rome.

The steps of the public baths were almost as crowded as the space
before the neighbouring building.  Incessant streams of people, either
entering or departing, poured over the broad flagstones of its marble
colonnades. This concourse, although composed in some parts of the same
class of people as that assembled before the palace, presented a
certain appearance of respectability.  Here and there--chequering the
dusky monotony of masses of dirty tunics--might be discerned the
refreshing vision of a clean robe, or the grateful indication of a
handsome person. Little groups, removed as far as possible from the
neighbourhood of the noisy plebeians, were scattered about, either
engaged in animated conversation, or listlessly succumbing to the
lassitude induced by a recent bath.  An instant's attention to the
subject of discourse among the more active of these individuals will
aid us in pursuing our social revelations.

The loudest voice among the speakers at this particular moment
proceeded from a tall, thin, sinister-looking man, who was haranguing a
little group of listeners with great vehemence and fluency.

'I tell you, Socius,' said he, turning suddenly upon one of his
companions, 'that, unless new slave-laws are made, my calling is at an
end.  My patron's estate requires incessant supplies of these wretches.
I do my best to satisfy the demand, and the only result of my labour
is, that the miscreants either endanger my life, or fly with impunity
to join the gangs of robbers infesting our woods.'

'Truly I am sorry for you; but what alteration would you have made in
the slave-laws?'

'I would empower bailiffs to slay upon the spot all slaves whom they
thought disorderly, as an example to the rest!'

'What would such a permission avail you?  These creatures are
necessary, and such a law would exterminate them in a few months.  Can
you not break their spirit with labour, bind their strength with
chains, and vanquish their obstinacy with dungeons?'


'All this I have done, but they die under the discipline, or escape
from their prisons.  I have now three hundred slaves on my patron's
estates. Against those born on our lands I have little to urge.  Many
of them, it is true, begin the day with weeping and end it with death;
but for the most part, thanks to their diurnal allowance of stripes,
they are tolerably submissive.  It is with the wretches that I have
been obliged to purchase from prisoners of war and the people of
revolted towns that I am so dissatisfied.  Punishments have no effect
on them, they are incessantly indolent, sulky, desperate.  It was but
the other day that ten of them poisoned themselves while at work in the
fields, and fifty more, after setting fire to a farm-house while my
back was turned, escaped to join a gang of their companions, who are
now robbers in the woods.  These fellows, however, are the last of the
troop who will perpetrate such offences. With the concurrence of my
patron, I have adopted a plan that will henceforth tame them
efficiently!'

'Are you at liberty to communicate it?'

'By the keys of St. Peter, I wish I could see it practised on every
estate in the land!  It is this:--Near a sulphur lake at some distance
from my farm-house is a tract of marshy ground, overspread here and
there by the ruins of an ancient slaughter-house.  I propose to dig in
this place several subterranean caverns, each of which shall be capable
of holding twenty men. Here my mutinous slaves shall sleep after their
day's labour.  The entrances shall be closed until morning with a large
stone, on which I will have engraven this inscription:  'These are the
dormitories invented by Gordian, bailiff of Saturninus, a nobleman, for
the reception of refractory slaves.'

'Your plan is ingenious; but I suspect your slaves (so insensible to
hardships are the brutal herd) will sleep as unconcernedly in their new
dormitories as in their old.'

'Sleep!  It will be a most original species of repose that they will
taste there!  The stench of the sulphur lake will breathe Sabian odours
for them over a couch of mud!  Their anointing oil will be the slime of
attendant reptiles!  Their liquid perfumes will be the stagnant oozings
from their chamber roof!  Their music will be the croaking of frogs and
the humming of gnats; and as for their adornments, why, they will be
decked forth with head-garlands of twining worms, and movable brooches
of cockchafers and toads!  Tell me now, most sagacious Socius, do you
still think that amidst such luxuries as these my slaves will sleep?'

'No; they will die.'

'You are again wrong.  They will curse and rave perhaps, but that is of
no consequence.  They will work the longer above ground to shorten the
term of their repose beneath.  They will wake at an instant's notice,
and come forth at a moment's signal.  I have no fear of their dying!'

'Do you leave Rome soon?'

'I go this evening, taking with me such a supply of trustworthy
assistants as will enable me to execute my plan without delay.
Farewell, Socius!'

'Most ingenious of bailiffs, I bid you farewell!'

As the worthy Gordian stalked off, big with the dignity of his new
projects, the gestures and tones of a man who formed one of a little
group collected in a remote part of the portico he was about to quit
attracted his attention.  Curiosity formed as conspicuous an ingredient
in this man's character as cruelty.  He stole behind the base of a
neighbouring pillar; and, as the frequent repetition of the word
'Goths' struck his ear (the report of that nation's impending invasion
having by this time reached Rome), he carefully disposed himself to
listen with the most implicit attention to the speaker's voice.


'Goths!' cried the man, in the stern, concentrated accents of despair.
'Is there one among us to whom this report of their advance upon Rome
does not speak of hope rather than of dread? Have we a chance of rising
from the degradation forced on us by our superiors until this den of
heartless triflers and shameless cowards is swept from the very earth
that it pollutes!'

'Your sentiments on the evils of our condition are undoubtedly most
just,' observed a fat, pompous man, to whom the preceding remarks had
been addressed, 'but I cannot desire the reform you so ardently hope
for.  Think of the degradation of being conquered by barbarians!'

'I am the exile of my country's privileges.  What interest have I in
upholding her honour--if honour she really has!' replied the first
speaker.

'Nay!  Your expressions are too severe.  You are too discontented to be
just.'

'Am I!  Hear me for a moment, and you will change your opinion.  You
see me now by my bearing and appearance superior to yonder plebeian
herd. You doubtless think that I live at my ease in the world, that I
can feel no anxiety for the future about my bodily necessities.  What
would you say were I to tell you that if I want another meal, a lodging
for to-night, a fresh robe for tomorrow, I must rob or flatter some
great man to gain them?  Yet so it is.  I am hopeless, friendless,
destitute.  In the whole of the Empire there is not an honest calling
in which I can take refuge.  I must become a pander or a parasite--a
hired tyrant over slaves, or a chartered groveller beneath nobles--if I
would not starve miserably in the streets, or rob openly in the woods!
This is what I am.  Now listen to what I was.  I was born free.  I
inherited from my father a farm which he had successfully defended from
the encroachments of the rich, at the expense of his comfort, his
health, and his life. When I succeeded to his lands, I determined to
protect them in my time as studiously as he had defended them in his.
I worked unintermittingly:  I enlarged my house, I improved my fields,
I increased my flocks.  One after another I despised the threats and
defeated the wiles of my noble neighbours, who desired possession of my
estate to swell their own territorial grandeur.  In process of time I
married and had a child.  I believed that I was picked out from my race
as a fortunate man--when one night I was attacked by robbers:  slaves
made desperate by the cruelty of their wealthy masters.  They ravaged
my cornfields, they deprived me of my flocks.  When I demanded redress,
I was told to sell my lands to those who could defend them--to those
rich nobles whose tyranny had organised the band of wretches who had
spoiled me of my possessions, and to whose fraud-gotten treasures the
government were well pleased to grant that protection which they had
denied to my honest hoards.  In my pride I determined that I would
still be independent.  I planted new crops.  With the little remnant of
my money I hired fresh servants and bought more flocks.  I had just
recovered from my first disaster when I became the victim of a second.
I was again attacked.  This time we had arms, and we attempted to
defend ourselves. My wife was slain before my eyes; my house was burnt
to the ground; I myself only escaped, mutilated with wounds; my child
soon afterwards pined and died.  I had no wife, no offspring, no house,
no money.  My fields still stretched round me, but I had none to
cultivate them.  My walls still tottered at my feet, but I had none to
rear them again, none to inhabit them if they were reared.  My father's
lands were now become a wilderness to me.  I was too proud to sell them
to my rich neighbour; I preferred to leave them before I saw them the
prey of a tyrant, whose rank had triumphed over my industry, and who is
now able to boast that he can travel over ten leagues of senatorial
property untainted by the propinquity of a husbandman's farm.
Houseless, homeless, friendless, I have come to Rome alone in my
affliction, helpless in my degradation! Do you wonder now that I am
careless about the honour of my country?  I would have served her with
my life and my possessions when she was worthy of my service; but she
has cast me off, and I care not who conquers her.  I say to the
Goths--with thousands who suffer the same tribulation that I now
undergo--"Enter our gates!  Level our palaces to the ground!  Confound,
if you will, in one common slaughter, we that are victims with those
that are tyrants!  Your invasion will bring new lords to the land.
They cannot crush it more--they may oppress it less.  Our posterity may
gain their rights by the sacrifice of lives that our country has made
worthless.  Romans though we are, we are ready to suffer and submit!"'


He stopped; for by this time he had lashed himself into fury.  His eyes
glared, his cheeks flushed, his voice rose.  Could he then have seen
the faintest vision of the destiny that future ages had in store for
the posterity of the race that now suffered throughout civilised
Europe, like him--could he have imagined how, in after years, the
'middle class', despised in his day, was to rise to privilege and
power; to hold in its just hands the balance of the prosperity of
nations; to crush oppression and regulate rule; to soar in its mighty
flight above thrones and principalities, and rank and riches,
apparently obedient, but really commanding;--could he but have
foreboded this, what a light must have burst upon his gloom, what a
hope must have soothed him in his despair!

To what further extremities his anger might have carried him, to what
proceedings the indignant Gordian, who still listened from his
concealment, might have had recourse, it is difficult to say; for the
complaints of the ill-fated landholder and the cogitations of the
authoritative bailiff were alike suddenly suspended by an uproar raging
at this moment round a carriage which had just emerged from the palace
we have elsewhere described.

This vehicle looked one mass of silver.  Embroidered silk curtains
fluttered all around it, gold ornaments studded its polished sides, and
it held no less a person than the nobleman who had feasted the people
with baskets of meat.  This fact had become known to the rabble before
the palace gates.  Such an opportunity of showing their exultation in
their bondage, their real servility in their imaginary independence,
was not to be lost; and accordingly they let loose such a torrent of
clamorous gratitude on their entertainer's appearance, that a stranger
in Rome would have thought the city in revolt.  They leapt, they ran,
they danced round the prancing horses, they flung their empty baskets
into the air, and patted approvingly their 'fair round bellies'.  From
every side, as the carriage moved on, they gained fresh recruits and
acquired new importance.  The timid fled before them, the noisy shouted
with them, the bold plunged into their ranks; and the constant burden
of their rejoicing chorus was--'Health to the noble Pomponius!
Prosperity to the senators of Rome, who feast us with their food and
give us the freedom of their theatres!  Glory to Pomponius!  Glory to
the senators!'

Fate seemed on this day to take pleasure in pampering the insatiable
curiosity of Gordian, the bailiff.  The cries of the multitude had
scarcely died away in the distance, as they followed the departing
carriage, when the voices of two men, pitched to a low, confidential
tone, reached his ear from the opposite side of the pillar.  He peeped
cautiously round, and saw that they were priests.

'What an eternal jester is that Pomponius!' said one voice.  'He is
going to receive absolution, and he journeys in his chariot of state,
as if he were preparing to celebrate his triumph, instead of to confess
his sins!'

'Has he committed, then, a fresh imprudence?'

'Alas, yes!  For a senator he is dreadfully wanting in caution!  A few
days since, in a fit of passion, he flung a drinking-cup at one of his
female slaves.  The girl died on the spot, and her brother, who is also
in his service, threatened immediate vengeance.  To prevent
disagreeable consequences to his body, Pomponius has sent the fellow to
his estates in Egypt; and now, from the same precaution for the welfare
of his soul, he goes to demand absolution from our holy and beneficent
Church.'

'I am afraid these incessant absolutions, granted to men who are too
careless even to make a show of repentance for their crimes, will
prejudice us with the people at large.'

'Of what consequence are the sentiments of the people while we have
their rulers on our side! Absolution is the sorcery that binds these
libertines of Rome to our will.  We know what converted
Constantine--politic flattery and ready absolution; the people will
tell you it was the sign of the Cross.'

'It is true this Pomponius is rich, and may increase our revenues, but
still I fear the indignation of the people.'

'Fear nothing:  think how long their old institutions imposed on them,
and then doubt, if you can, that we may shape them to our wishes as we
will.  Any deceptions will be successful with a mob, if the instrument
employed to forward them be a religion.'

The voices ceased.  Gordian, who still cherished a vague intention of
denouncing the fugitive landholder to the senatorial authorities,
employed the liberty afforded to his attention by the silence of the
priests in turning to look after his intended victim.  To his surprise
he saw that the man had left the auditors to whom he had before
addressed himself, and was engaged in earnest conversation in another
part of the portico, with an individual who seemed to have recently
joined him, and whose appearance was so remarkable that the bailiff had
moved a few steps forwards to gain a nearer view of him, when he was
once more arrested by the voices of the priests.

Irresolute for an instant to which party to devote his unscrupulous
attention, he returned mechanically to his old position.  Ere long,
however, his anxiety to hear the mysterious communications proceeding
between the landholder and his friend overbalanced his delight in
penetrating the theological secrets of the priests.  He turned once
more, but to his astonishment the objects of his curiosity had
disappeared.  He stepped to the outside of the portico and looked for
them in every direction, but they were nowhere to be seen.  Peevish and
disappointed, he returned as a last resource to the pillar where he had
left the priests, but the time consumed in his investigations after one
party had been fatal to his reunion with the other.  The churchmen were
gone.

Sufficiently punished for his curiosity by his disappointment, the
bailiff walked doggedly off towards the Pincian Hill.  Had he turned in
the contrary direction, towards the Basilica of St. Peter, he would
have found himself once more in the neighbourhood of the landholder and
his remarkable friend, and would have gained that acquaintance with the
subjects of their conversation, which we intend that the reader shall
acquire in the course of the next chapter.



CHAPTER 4.

THE CHURCH.

In the year 324, on the locality assigned by rumour to the martyrdom of
St. Peter, and over the ruins of the Circus of Nero, Constantine
erected the church called the Basilica of St. Peter.

For twelve centuries, this building, raised by a man infamous for his
murders and his tyrannies, stood uninjured amid the shocks which during
that long period devastated the rest of the city. After that time it
was removed, tottering to its base from its own reverend and
illustrious age, by Pope Julius II, to make way for the foundations of
the modern church.

It is towards this structure of twelve hundred years' duration, erected
by hands stained with blood, and yet preserved as a star of peace in
the midst of stormy centuries of war, that we would direct the reader's
attention.  What art has done for the modern church, time has effected
for the ancient.  If the one is majestic to the eye by its grandeur,
the other is hallowed to the memory by its age.


As this church by its rise commemorated the triumphant establishment of
Christianity as the religion of Rome, so in its progress it reflected
every change wrought in the spirit of the new worship by the ambition,
the prodigality, or the frivolity of the priests.  At first it stood
awful and imposing, beautiful in all its parts as the religion for
whose glory it was built.  Vast porphyry colonnades decorated its
approaches, and surrounded a fountain whose waters issued from the
representation of a gigantic pine-tree in bronze.  Its double rows of
aisles were each supported by forty-eight columns of precious marble.
Its flat ceiling was adorned with beams of gilt metal, rescued from the
pollution of heathen temples.  Its walls were decorated with large
paintings of religious subjects, and its tribunal was studded with
elegant mosaics. Thus it rose, simple and yet sublime, awful and yet
alluring; in this its beginning, a type of the dawn of the worship
which it was elevated to represent.  But when, flushed with success,
the priests seized on Christianity as their path to politics and their
introduction to power, the aspect of the church gradually began to
change.  As, slowly and insensibly, ambitious man heaped the garbage of
his mysteries, his doctrines, and his disputes, about the pristine
purity of the structure given him by God, so, one by one, gaudy
adornments and meretricious alterations arose to sully the once
majestic basilica, until the threatening and reproving apparition of
the pagan Julian, when both Church and churchmen received in their
corrupt progress a sudden and impressive check.

The short period of the revival of idolatry once passed over, the
priests, unmoved by the warning they had received, returned with
renewed vigour to confuse that which both in their Gospel and their
Church had been once simple.  Day by day they put forth fresh
treatises, aroused fierce controversies, subsided into new sects; and
day by day they altered more and more the once noble aspect of the
ancient basilica. They hung their nauseous relics on its mighty walls,
they stuck their tiny tapers about its glorious pillars, they wreathed
their tawdry fringes around its massive altars.  Here they polished,
there they embroidered. Wherever there was a window, they curtained it
with gaudy cloths; wherever there was a statue, they bedizened it with
artificial flowers; wherever there was a solemn recess, they outraged
its religious gloom with intruding light; until (arriving at the period
we write of) they succeeded so completely in changing the aspect of the
building, that it looked, within, more like a vast pagan toyshop than a
Christian church.  Here and there, it is true, a pillar or an altar
rose unencumbered as of old, appearing as much at variance with the
frippery that surrounded it as a text of Scripture quoted in a sermon
of the time.  But as regarded the general aspect of the basilica, the
decent glories of its earlier days seemed irrevocably departed and
destroyed.

After what has been said of the edifice, the reader will have little
difficulty in imagining that the square in which it stood lost whatever
elevation of character it might once have possessed, with even greater
rapidity than the church itself.  If the cathedral now looked like an
immense toyshop, assuredly its attendant colonnades had the appearance
of the booths of an enormous fair.


The day, whose decline we have hinted at in the preceding chapter, was
fast verging towards its close, as the inhabitants of the streets on
the western bank of the Tiber prepared to join the crowds that they
beheld passing by their windows in the direction of the Basilica of St.
Peter. The cause of this sudden confluence of the popular current in
once common direction was made sufficiently apparent to all inquirers
who happened to be near a church or a public building, by the
appearance in such situations of a large sheet of vellum elaborately
illuminated, raised on a high pole, and guarded from contact with the
inquisitive rabble by two armed soldiers.  The announcements set forth
in these strange placards were all of the same nature and directed to
the same end.  In each of them the Bishop of Rome informed his 'pious
and honourable brethren', the inhabitants of the city, that, as the
next days was the anniversary of the Martyrdom of St. Luke, the vigil
would necessarily be held on that evening in the Basilica of St. Peter;
and that, in consideration of the importance of the occasion, there
would be exhibited, before the commencement of the ceremony, those
precious relics connected with the death of the saint, which had become
the inestimable inheritance of the Church; and which consisted of a
branch of the olive-tree to which St. Luke was hung, a piece of the
noose--including the knot--which had been passed round his neck, and a
picture of the Apotheosis of the Virgin painted by his own hand.  After
some sentences expressive of lamentation for the sufferings of the
saint, which nobody read, and which it is unnecessary to reproduce
here, the proclamation went on to state that a sermon would be preached
in the course of the vigil, and that at a later hour the great
chandelier, containing two thousand four hundred lamps, would be lit to
illuminate the church.  Finally, the worthy bishop called upon all
members of his flock, in consideration of the solemnity of the day, to
abstain from sensual pleasures, in order that they might the more
piously and worthily contemplate the sacred objects submitted to their
view, and digest the spiritual nourishment to be offered to their
understandings.

From the specimen we have already given of the character of the
populace of Rome, it will perhaps be unnecessary to say that the great
attractions presented by this theological bill of fare were the relics
and the chandelier.  Pulpit eloquence and vigil solemnities alone must
have long exhibited their more sober allurements, before they could
have drawn into the streets a fiftieth part of the immense crowd that
now hurried towards the desecrated basilica. Indeed, so vast was the
assemblage soon congregated, that the advanced ranks of sightseers had
already filled the church to overflowing, before those in the rear had
come within view of the colonnades.

However dissatisfied the unsuccessful portion of the citizens might
feel at their exclusion from the church, they found a powerful
counter-attraction in the amusements going forward in the Place, the
occupants of which seemed thoroughly regardless of the bishop's
admonitions upon the sobriety of behaviour due to the solemnity of the
day.  As if in utter defiance of the decency and order recommended by
the clergy, popular exhibitions of all sorts were set up on the broad
flagstones of the great space before the church.  Street dancing-girls
exercised at every available spot those 'gliding gyrations' so
eloquently condemned by the worthy Ammianus Marcellinus of orderly and
historical memory. Booths crammed with relics of doubtful authenticity,
baskets filled with neat manuscript abstracts of furiously
controversial pamphlets, pagan images regenerated into portraits of
saints, pictorial representations of Arians writhing in damnation, and
martyrs basking in haloes of celestial light, tempted, in every
direction, the more pious among the spectators.  Cooks perambulated
with their shops on their backs; rival slave-merchants shouted
petitions for patronage; wine-sellers taught Bacchanalian philosophy
from the tops of their casks; poets recited compositions for sale;
sophisters held arguments destined to convert the wavering and perplex
the ignorant.

Incessant motion and incessant noise seemed to be the sole
compensations sought by the multitude for the disappointment of
exclusion from the church.  If a stranger, after reading the
proclamation of the day, had proceeded to the basilica, to feast his
eyes on the contemplation of the illustrious aggregate of humanity,
entitled by the bishop 'his pious and honourable brethren,' he must, on
mixing at this moment with the assemblage, have either doubted the
truth of the episcopal appellation, or have given the citizens credit
for that refinement of intrinsic worth which is of too elevated a
nature to influence the character of the outward man.


At the time when the sun set, nothing could be more picturesque than
the distant view of this joyous scene.  The deep red rays of the
departing luminary cast their radiance, partly from behind the church,
over the vast multitude in the Place.  Brightly and rapidly the rich
light roved over the waters that leaped towards it from the fountain in
all the loveliness of natural and evanescent form.  Bathed in that
brilliant glow, the smooth porphyry colonnades reflected, chameleon
like, ethereal and varying hues; the white marble statues became
suffused in a delicate rose-colour, and the sober-tinted trees gleamed
in the innermost of their leafy depths as if steeped in the exhalations
of a golden mist. While, contrasting strangely with the wondrous
radiance around them, the huge bronze pine-tree in the middle of the
Place, and the wide front of the basilica, rose up in gloomy shadow,
indefinite and exaggerated, lowering like evil spirits over the joyous
beauty of the rest of the scene, and casting their great depths of
shade into the midst of the light whose dominion they despised.  Beheld
from a distance, this wild combination of vivid brightness and solemn
gloom; these buildings, at one place darkened till they looked
gigantic, at another lightened till they appeared ethereal; these
crowded groups, seeming one great moving mass gleaming at this point in
radiant light, obscured at that in thick shadow, made up a whole so
incongruous and yet so beautiful, so grotesque and yet so sublime, that
the scene looked, for the moment, more like some inhabited meteor, half
eclipsed by its propinquity to earth, than a mortal and material
prospect.

The beauties of this atmospheric effect were of far too serious and
sublime a nature to interest the multitude in the Place.  Out of the
whole assemblage, but two men watched that glorious sunset with even an
appearance of the admiration and attention which it deserved.  One was
the landholder whose wrongs were related in the preceding chapter--the
other his remarkable friend.

These two men formed a singular contrast to each other, both in
demeanour and appearance, as they gazed forth upon the crimson heaven.
The landholder was an under-sized, restless-looking man, whose
features, naturally sharp, were now distorted by a fixed expression of
misery and discontent.  His quick, penetrating glance wandered
incessantly from place to place, perceiving all things, but resting on
none.  In his attention to the scene before him, he appeared to have
been led more by the influence of example than by his own spontaneous
feelings; for ever and anon he looked impatiently round upon his friend
as if expecting him to speak--but no word or movement escaped his
thoughtful companion. Occupied exclusively in his own contemplations,
he appeared wholly insensible to any ordinary outward appeal.

In age and appearance this individual was in the decline of life; for
he had numbered sixty years, his hair was completely grey, and his face
was covered with deep wrinkles.  Yet, in spite of these disadvantages,
he was in the highest sense of the word a handsome man.  Though worn
and thin, his features were still bold and regular; and there was an
elevation about the habitual mournfulness of his expression, and an
intelligence about his somewhat severe and earnest eyes, that bore
eloquent testimony to the superiority of his intellectual powers.  As
he now stood gazing fixedly out into the glowing sky, his tall, meagre
figure half supported upon his staff, his lips firmly compressed, his
brow slightly frowning, and his attitude firm and motionless, the most
superficial observer must have felt immediately that he looked on no
ordinary being.  The history of a life of deep thought--perhaps of long
sorrow--seemed written in every lineament of his meditative
countenance; and there was a natural dignity in his manner, which
evidently restrained his restless companion from offering any
determined interruption to the course of his reflections.

Slowly and gorgeously the sun had continued to wane in the horizon
until he was now lost to view.  As his last rays sunk behind the
distant hills, the stranger started from his reverie and approached the
landholder, pointing with his staff towards the fast-fading brightness
of the western sky.

'Probus,' said he, in a low, melancholy voice, 'as I looked on that
sunset I thought on the condition of the Church.'

'I see little in the Church to think of, or in the sunset to observe,'
replied his companion.

'How pure, how vivid,' murmured the other, scarcely heeding the
landholder's remark, 'was the light which that sun cast upon this earth
at our feet!  How nobly for a time its brightness triumphed over the
shadows around; and yet, in spite of the promise of that radiance, how
swiftly did it fade ere long in its conflict with the gloom--how
thoroughly, even now, has it departed from the earth, and withdrawn the
beauty of its glory from the heavens!  Already the shadows are
lengthening around us, and shrouding in their darkness every object in
the Place.  But a short hour hence, and--should no moon arise--the
gloom of night will stretch unresisted over Rome!'

'To what purpose do you tell me this?'


'Are you not reminded, by what we have observed, of the course of the
worship which it is our privilege to profess?  Does not that first
beautiful light denote its pure and perfect rise; that short conflict
between the radiance and the gloom, its successful preservation, by the
Apostles and the Fathers; that rapid fading of the radiance, its
desecration in later times; and the gloom which now surrounds us, the
destruction which has encompassed it in this age we live in?--a
destruction which nothing can avert but a return to that pure first
faith that should now be the hope of our religion, as the moon is the
hope of night!'

'How should we reform?  Do people who have no liberties care about a
religion?  Who is to teach them?'

'I have--I will.  It is the purpose of my life to restore to them the
holiness of the ancient Church; to rescue them from the snare of
traitors to the faith, whom men call priests.  They shall learn through
me that the Church knew no adornment once, but the presence of the
pure; that the priest craved no finer vestment than his holiness; that
the Gospel, which once taught humility and now raises dispute, was in
former days the rule of faith--sufficient for all wants, powerful over
all difficulties.  Through me they shall know that in times past it was
the guardian of the heart; through me they shall see that in times
present it is the plaything of the proud; through me they shall fear
that in times future it may become the exile of the Church!  To this
task I have vowed myself; to overthrow this idolatry--which, like
another paganism, rises among us with its images, its relics, its
jewels, and its gold--I will devote my child, my life, my energies, and
my possessions.  From this attempt I will never turn aside--from this
determination I will never flinch.  While I have a breath of life in
me, I will persevere in restoring to this abandoned city the true
worship of the Most High!'

He ceased abruptly.  The intensity of his agitation seemed suddenly to
deny to him the faculty of speech.  Every muscle in the frame of that
stern, melancholy man quivered at the immortal promptings of the soul
within him.  There was something almost feminine in his universal
susceptibility to the influence of one solitary emotion.  Even the
rough, desperate landholder felt awed by the enthusiasm of the being
before him, and forgot his wrongs, terrible as they were--and his
misery, poignant as it was--as he gazed upon his companion's face.

For some minutes neither of the men said more.  Soon, however, the last
speaker calmed his agitation with the facility of a man accustomed to
stifle the emotions that he cannot crush, and advancing to the
landholder, took him sorrowfully by the hand.

'I see, Probus, that I have amazed you,' said he; 'but the Church is
the only subject on which I have no discretion.  In all other matters I
have conquered the rashness of my early manhood; in this I have to
wrestle with my hastier nature still.  When I look on the mockeries
that are acting around us; when I behold a priesthood deceivers, a
people deluded, a religion defiled, then, I confess it, my indignation
overpowers my patience, and I burn to destroy, where I ought only to
hope to reform.'

'I knew you always violent of imagination; but when I last saw you your
enthusiasm was love. Your wife--'

'Peace!  She deceived me!'

'Your child--'

'Lives with me at Rome.'

'I remember her an infant, when, fourteen years since, I was your
neighbour in Gaul.  On my departure from the province, you had just
returned from a journey into Italy, unsuccessful in your attempts to
discover there a trace either of your parents, or of that elder brother
whose absence you were wont so continually to lament.  Tell me, have
you, since that period, discovered the members of your ancient
household?  Hitherto you have been so occupied in listening to the
history of my wrongs that you have scarcely spoken of the changes in
your life since we last met.'


'If, Probus, I have been silent to you concerning myself, it is because
for me retrospection has little that attracts.  While yet it was in my
power to return to those parents whom I deserted in my boyhood, I
thought not of repentance; and now that they must be but too surely
lost to me, my yearning towards them is of no avail.  Of my brother,
from whom I parted in a moment of childish jealousy and anger, and
whose pardon and love I would give up even my ambition to acquire, I
have never yet discovered a trace.  Atonement to those whom I  injured
in early life is a privilege denied to the prayers of my age.  From my
parents and my brother I departed unblest, and unforgiven by them I
feel that I am doomed to die!  My life has been careless, useless,
godless, passing from rapine and violence to luxury and indolence, and
leading me to the marriage which I exulted in when I last saw you, but
which I now feel was unworthy alike in its motives and its results.
But blessed and thrice blessed by that last calamity of my wicked
existence, for it opened my eyes to the truth--it made a Christian of
me while I was yet alive!'

'Is it thus that the Christian can view his afflictions?  I would,
then, that I were a Christian like you!' murmured the landholder, in
low, earnest tones.

'It was in those first days, Probus,' continued the other, 'when I
found myself deserted and dishonoured, left alone to be the guardian of
my helpless child, exiled for ever from a home that I had myself
forsaken, that I repented me in earnest of my misdeeds, that I sought
wisdom from the book of salvation, and the conduct of life from the
Fathers of the Church.  It was at that time that I determined to devote
my child, like Samuel of old, to the service of heaven, and myself to
the reformation of our degraded worship.  As I have already told you, I
forsook my abode and changed my name (remember it is as 'Numerian' that
you must henceforth address me), that of my former self no remains
might be left, that of my former companions not one might ever discover
and tempt me again.  With incessant care have I shielded my daughter
from the contamination of the world.  As a precious jewel in a miser's
hands she has been watched and guarded in her father's house.  Her
destiny is to soothe the afflicted, to watch the sick, to succour the
forlorn, when I, her teacher, have restored to the land the dominion of
its ancient faith and the guidance of its faultless Gospel.  We have
neither of us an affection or a hope that can bind us to the things of
earth.  Our hearts look both towards heaven; our expectations are only
from on high!'

'Do not set your hopes too firmly on your child.  Remember how the
nobles of Rome have destroyed the household I once had, and tremble for
your own.'

'I have no fear for my daughter; she is cared for in my absence by one
who is vowed to aid me in my labours for the Church.  It is now nearly
a year since I first met Ulpius, and from that time forth he has
devoted himself to my service and watched over my child.'

'Who is this Ulpius, that you should put such faith in him?'

'He is a man of age like mine.  I found him, like me, worn down by the
calamities of his early life, and abandoned, as I had once been, to the
delusions of the pagan gods.  He was desolate, suffering, forlorn, and
I had pity on him in his misery.  I proved to him that the worship he
still professed was banished for its iniquities from the land; that the
religion which had succeeded it had become defiled by man, and that
there remained but one faith for him to choose, if he would be
saved--the faith of the early Church.  He heard me and was converted.
From that moment he has served me patiently and helped me willingly.
Under the roof where I assemble the few who as yet are true believers,
he is always the first to come and the last to remain.  No word of
anger has ever crossed his lips--no look of impatience has ever
appeared in his eyes. Though sorrowful, he is gentle; though suffering,
he is industrious.  I have trusted him with all I possess, and I glory
in my credulity!  Ulpius is incorruptible!'

'And your daughter?--is Ulpius reverenced by her as he is respected by
you?'


'She knows that her duty is to love whom I love, and to avoid whom I
avoid.  Can you imagine that a Christian virgin has any feelings
disobedient to her father's wishes?  Come to my house; judge with your
own eyes of my daughter and my companion.  You, whose misfortunes have
left you no home, shall find one, if you will, with me.  Come then and
labour with me in my great undertaking!  You will withdraw your mind
from the contemplation of your woes, and merit by your devotion the
favour of the Most High.'

'No, Numerian, I will still be independent, even of my friends!  Nor
Rome nor Italy are abiding-places for me.  I go to another land to
abide among another people, until the arms of a conqueror shall have
restored freedom to the brave and protection to the honest throughout
the countries of the Empire.'

'Probus, I implore you stay!'

'Never!  My determination is taken, Numerian--farewell!'

For a few minutes Numerian stood motionless, gazing wistfully in the
direction taken by his companion on his departure.  At first an
expression of grief and pity softened the austerity which seemed the
habitual characteristic of his countenance when in repose, but soon
these milder and tenderer feelings appeared to vanish from his heart as
suddenly as they had arisen; his features reassumed their customary
sternness, and he muttered to himself as he mixed with the crowd
struggling onwards in the direction of the basilica:  'Let him depart
unregretted; he has denied himself to the service of his Maker.  He
should no longer be my friend.'

In this sentence lay the index to the character of the man.  His
existence was one vast sacrifice, one scene of intrepid
self-immolation. Although, in the brief hints at the events of his life
which he had communicated to his friend, he had exaggerated the extent
of his errors, he had by no means done justice to the fervour of his
penitence--a penitence which outstripped the usual boundaries of
repentance, and only began in despair to terminate in fanaticism.  His
desertion of his father's house (into the motives of which it is not
our present intention to enter), and his long subsequent existence of
violence and excess, indisposed his naturally strong passions to submit
to the slightest restraint.  In obedience to their first impulses, he
contracted, at a mature age, a marriage with a woman thoroughly
unworthy of the ardent admiration that she had inspired.  When he found
himself deceived and dishonoured by her, the shock of such an
affliction thrilled through his whole being--crushed all his
energies--struck him prostrate, heart and mind, at one blow.  The
errors of his youth, committed in his prosperity with moral impunity,
reacted upon him in his adversity with an influence fatal to his future
peace.  His repentance was darkened by despondency; his resolutions
were unbrightened by hope. He flew to religion as the suicide flies to
the knife--in despair.

Leaving all remaining peculiarities in Numerian's character to be
discussed at a future opportunity, we will now follow him in his
passage through the crowd, to the entrance of the basilica--continuing
to designate him, here and elsewhere, by the name which he had assumed
on his conversion, and by which he had insisted on being addressed
during his interview with the fugitive landholder.

Although at the commencement of his progress towards the church, our
enthusiast found himself placed among the hindermost of the members of
the advancing throng, he soon contrived so thoroughly to outstrip his
dilatory and discursive neighbours as to gain, with little delay, the
steps of the sacred building.  Here, in common with many others, he was
compelled to stop, while those nearest the basilica squeezed their way
through its stately doors.  In such a situation his remarkable figure
could not fail to be noticed, and he was silently recognised by many of
the bystanders, some of whom looked on him with wonder, and some with
aversion. Nobody, however, approached or spoke to him.  Every one felt
the necessity of shunning a man whose bold and daily exposures of the
abuses of the Church placed in incessant peril his liberty, and even
his life.


Among the bystanders who surrounded Numerian, there were nevertheless
two who did not remain content with carelessly avoiding any
communication with the intrepid and suspected reformer.  These two men
belonged to the lowest order of the clergy, and appeared to be occupied
in cautiously watching the actions and listening to the conversation of
the individuals immediately around them.  The instant they beheld
Numerian they moved so as to elude his observation, taking care at the
same time to occupy such a position as enabled them to keep in view the
object of their evident distrust.

'Look, Osius,' said one, 'that man is here again!'

'And doubtless with the same motives which brought him here yesterday,'
replied the other. 'You will see that he will again enter the church,
listen to the service, retire to his little chapel near the Pincian
Mount, and there, before his ragged mob of adherents, attack the
doctrines which our brethren have preached, as we know he did last
night, and as we suspect he will continue to do until the authorities
think proper to give the signal for his imprisonment.'

'I marvel that he should have been permitted to persist so long a time
as he has in his course of contumacy towards the Church.  Have we not
evidence enough in his writings alone to convict him of heresy?  The
carelessness of the bishop upon such a matter as this is quite
inexplicable!'

'You should consider, Numerian not being a priest, that the
carelessness about our interests lies more with the senate than the
bishop.  What time our nobles can spare from their debaucheries has
been lately given to discussions on the conduct of the Emperor in
retiring to Ravenna, and will now be dedicated to penetrating the basis
of this rumour about the Goths.  Besides, even were they at liberty,
what care the senate about theological disputes? They only know this
Numerian as a citizen of Rome, a man of some influence and possessions,
and, consequently, a person of political importance as a member of the
population.  In addition to which, it would be no easy task for us at
the present moment to impugn the doctrines broached by our assailant;
for the fellow has a troublesome facility of supporting what he says by
the Bible.  Believe me, in this matter, our only way of righting
ourselves will be to convict him of scandal against the highest
dignitaries of the Church.'

'The order that we have lately received to track his movements and
listen to his discourses, leads me to believe that our superiors are of
your opinion.'

'Whether my convictions are correct or not, of this I feel
assured--that his days of liberty are numbered.  It was but a few hours
ago that I saw the bishop's chamberlain's head-assistant, and he told
me that he had heard, through the crevice of a door--'

'Hush! he moves; he is pressing forward to enter the church.  You can
tell me what you were about to say as we follow him.  Quick! let us mix
with the crowd.'

Ever enthusiastic in the performance of their loathsome duties, these
two discreet pastors of a Christian flock followed Numerian with the
most elaborate caution into the interior of the sacred building.


Although the sun still left a faint streak of red in the western sky,
and the moon had as yet scarcely risen, the great chandelier of two
thousand four hundred lamps, mentioned by the bishop in his address to
the people, was already alight.  In the days of its severe and sacred
beauty, the appearance of the church would have suffered fatally by
this blaze of artificial brilliancy; but now that the ancient character
of the basilica was completely changed, now that from a solemn temple
it had been altered to the semblance of a luxurious palace, it gained
immensely by its gaudy illumination.  Not an ornament along the vast
extent of its glorious nave but glittered in vivid distinctness in the
dazzling light that poured downwards from the roof.  The gilded
rafters, the smooth inlaid marble pillars, the rich hangings of the
windows, the jewelled candlesticks on the altars, the pictures, the
statues, the bronzes, the mosaics, each and all glowed with a steady
and luxurious transparency absolutely intoxicating to the eye. Not a
trace of wear, not a vestige of tarnish now appeared on any object.
Each portion of the nave to which the attention was directed appeared
too finely, spotlessly radiant, ever to have been touched by mortal
hands. Entranced and bewildered, the observation roamed over the
surface of the brilliant scene, until, wearied by the unbroken
embellishment of the prospect, it wandered for repose upon the dimly
lighted aisles, and dwelt with delight upon the soft shadows that
hovered about their distant pillars, and the gliding forms that peopled
their dusky recesses, or loitered past their lofty walls.

At the moment when Numerian entered the basilica, a part of the service
had just concluded. The last faint echo from the voices of the choir
still hung upon the incense-laden air, and the vast masses of the
spectators were still grouped in their listening and various attitudes,
as the devoted reformer looked forth upon the church.  Even he, stern
as he was, seemed for a moment subdued by the ineffable enchantment of
the scene; but ere long, as if displeased with his own involuntary
emotions of admiration, his brow contracted, and he sighed heavily, as
(still followed by the attentive spies) he sought the comparative
seclusion of the aisles.

During the interval between the divisions of the service, the
congregation occupied themselves in staring at the relics, which were
enclosed in a silver cabinet with crystal doors, and placed on the top
of the high altar.  Although it was impossible to obtain a satisfactory
view of these ecclesiastical treasures, they nevertheless employed the
attention of every one until the appearance of a priest in the pulpit
gave signal of the commencement of the sermon, and admonished all those
who had seats to secure them without delay.

Passing through the ranks of the auditors of the sermon--some of whom
were engaged in counting the lights in the chandelier, to be certain
that the bishop had not defrauded them of one out of the two thousand
four hundred lamps; others in holding whispered conversations, and
opening small boxes of sweetmeats--we again conduct the reader to the
outside of the church.

The assemblage here had by this time much diminished; the shadows flung
over the ground by the lofty colonnades had deepened and increased; and
in many of the more remote recesses of the Place hardly a human being
was to be observed.  At one of these extremities, where the pillars
terminated in the street and the obscurity was most intense, stood a
solitary old man keeping himself cautiously concealed in the darkness,
and looking out anxiously upon the public way immediately before him.

He had waited but a short time when a handsome chariot, preceded by a
body-guard of gaily-attired slaves, stopped within a few paces of his
lurking-place, and the voice of the person it contained pronounced
audibly the following words:--

'No! no!  Drive on--we are later than I thought.  If I stay to see this
illumination of the basilica, I shall not be in time to receive my
guests for to-night's banquet.  Besides, this inestimable kitten of the
breed most worshipped by the ancient Egyptians has already taken cold,
and I would not for the world expose the susceptible animal any longer
than is necessary to the dampness of the night-air.  Drive on, good
Carrio, drive on!'

The old man scarcely waited for the conclusion of this speech before he
ran up to the chariot, where he was immediately confronted by two
heads--one that of Vetranio the senator, the other that of a glossy
black kitten adorned with a collar of rubies, and half enveloped in its
master's ample robes.  Before the astonished noble could articulate a
word, the man whispered in hoarse, hurried accents, 'I am
Ulpius--dismiss your servants--I have something important to say!'

'Ha! my worthy Ulpius!  You have a most unhappy faculty of delivering a
message with the manner of an assassin!  But I must pardon your
unpleasant abruptness in consideration of your diligence.  My excellent
Carrio, If you value my approbation, remove your companions and
yourself out of hearing!'


The freedman yielded instant obedience to his master's mandate.  The
following conversation then took place, the strange man opening it
thus:--

'You remember your promise?'

'I do.'

'Upon your honour, as a nobleman and a senator, you are prepared to
abide by it whenever it is necessary?'

'I am.'

'Then at the dawn of morning meet me at the private gate of your palace
garden, and I will conduct you to Antonina's bedchamber.'

'The time will suit me.  But why at the dawn of morning?'

'Because the Christian dotard will keep a vigil until midnight, which
the girl will most probably attend.  I wished to tell you this at your
palace, but I heard there that you had gone to Aricia, and would return
by way of the basilica; so I posted myself to intercept you thus.'

'Industrious Ulpius!'

'Remember your promise!'

Vetranio leaned forward to reply, but Ulpius was gone.

As the senator again commanded his equipage to move on, he looked
anxiously around him, as if once more expecting to see his strange
adherent still lurking near the chariot.  He only perceived, however, a
man whom he did not know, followed by two other, walking rapidly past
him.  They were Numerian and the spies.

'At last, my projects are approaching consummation,' exclaimed Vetranio
to himself, as he and his kitten rolled off in the chariot.  'It is
well that I thought of securing possession of Julia's villa to-day, for
I shall now, assuredly, want to use it to-morrow.  Jupiter!  What a
mass of dangers, contradictions, and mysteries encompass this affair!
When I think that I, who pride myself on my philosophy, have quitted
Ravenna, borrowed a private villa, leagued myself with an uncultivated
plebeian, and all for the sake of a girl who has already deceived my
expectations by gaining me as a music-master without admitting me as a
lover, I am positively astonished at my own weakness!  Still it must be
owned that the complexion my adventure has lately assumed renders it of
some interest in itself.  The mere pleasure of penetrating the secrets
of this Numerian's household is by no means the least among the
numerous attraction of my design.  How has he gained his influence over
the girl? Why does he keep her in such strict seclusion?  Who is this
old half-frantic, unceremonious man-monster calling himself Ulpius;
refusing all reward for his villainy; raving about a return to the old
religion of the gods; and exulting in the promise he has extorted from
me, as a good pagan, to support the first restoration of the ancient
worship that may be attempted in Rome?  Where does he come from?  Why
does he outwardly profess himself a Christian?  What sent him into
Numerian's service?  By the girdle of Venus! everything connected with
the girl is as incomprehensible as herself!  But patience--patience!  A
few hours more, and these mysteries will be revealed.  In the meantime,
let me think of my banquet, and of its presiding deity, the Nightingale
Sauce!'



CHAPTER 5.

ANTONINA.

Who that has been at Rome does not remember with delight the
attractions of the Pincian Hill?  Who, after toiling through the
wonders of the dark, melancholy city, has not been revived by a visit
to its shady walks, and by breathing its fragrant breezes?  Amid the
solemn mournfulness that reigns over declining Rome, this delightful
elevation rises light, airy, and inviting, at once a refreshment to the
body and a solace to the spirit.  From its smooth summit the city is
seen in its utmost majesty, and the surrounding country in its
brightest aspect. The crimes and miseries of Rome seem deterred from
approaching its favoured soil; it impresses the mind as a place set
apart by common consent for the presence of the innocent and the
joyful--as a scene that rest and recreation keep sacred from the
intrusion of tumult and toil.

Its appearance in modern days is the picture of its character for ages
past.  Successive wars might dull its beauties for a time, but peace
invariably restored them in all their pristine loveliness.  The old
Romans called it 'The Mount of Gardens'.  Throughout the disasters of
the Empire and the convulsions of the Middle Ages, it continued to
merit its ancient appellation, and a 'Mount of Gardens' it still
triumphantly remains to the present day.

At the commencement of the fifth century the magnificence of the
Pincian Hill was at its zenith. Were it consistent with the conduct of
our story to dwell upon the glories of its palaces and its groves, its
temples and its theatres, such a glowing prospect of artificial
splendour, aided by natural beauty, might be spread before the reader
as would tax his credulity, while it excited his astonishment.  This
task, however, it is here unnecessary to attempt.  It is not for the
wonders of ancient luxury and taste, but for the abode of the zealous
and religious Numerian, that we find it now requisite to arouse
interest and engage attention.

At the back of the Flaminian extremity of the Pincian Hill, and
immediately overlooking the city wall, stood, at the period of which we
write, a small but elegantly built house, surrounded by a little garden
of its own, and protected at the back by the lofty groves and
outbuildings of the palace of Vetranio the senator.  This abode had
been at one time a sort of summer-house belonging to the former
proprietor of a neighbouring mansion.

Profligate necessities, however, had obliged the owner to part with
this portion of his possessions, which was purchased by a merchant well
known to Numerian, who received it as a legacy at his friend's death.
Disgusted, as soon as his reforming projects took possession of his
mind, at the bare idea of propinquity to the ennobled libertines of
Rome, the austere Christian determined to abandon his inheritance, and
to sell it to another; but, at the repeated entreaties of his daughter,
he at length consented to change his purpose, and sacrifice his
antipathy to his luxurious neighbours to his child's youthful
attachment to the beauties of Nature as displayed in his legacy on the
Pincian Mount.  In this instance only did the natural affection of the
father prevail over the acquired severity of the reformer.  Here he
condescended, for the first and the last time, to the sweet
trivialities of youth.  Here, indulgent in spite of himself, he fixed
his little household, and permitted to his daughter her sole
recreations of tending the flowers in the garden and luxuriating in the
loveliness of the distant view.

      *      *      *      *      *

The night has advanced an hour since the occurrence mentioned in the
preceding chapter. The clear and brilliant moonlight of Italy now
pervades every district of the glorious city, and bathes in its pure
effulgence the groves and palaces on the Pincian Mount.  From the
garden of Numerian the irregular buildings of the great suburbs of
Rome, the rich undulating country beyond, and the long ranges of
mountains in the distance, are now all visible in the soft and
luxurious light.  Near the spot which commands this view, not a living
creature is to be seen on a first examination; but on a more
industrious and patient observation, you are subsequently able to
detect at one of the windows of Numerian's house, half hidden by a
curtain, the figure of a young girl.


Soon this solitary form approaches nearer to the eye.  The moonbeams,
that have hitherto shone only upon the window, now illuminate other
objects.  First they display a small, white arm; then a light, simple
robe; then a fair, graceful neck; and finally a bright, youthful,
innocent face, directed steadfastly towards the wide moon-brightened
prospect of the distant mountains.

For some time the girl remains in contemplation at her window.  Then
she leaves her post, and almost immediately reappears at a door leading
into the garden.  Her figure, as she advances towards the lawn before
her, is light and small--a natural grace and propriety appear in her
movements--she holds pressed to her bosom and half concealed by her
robe, a gilt lute.  When she reaches a turf bank commanding the same
view as the window, she arranges her instrument upon her knees, and
with something of restraint in her manner gently touches the chords.
Then, as if alarmed at the sound she has produced, she glances
anxiously around her, apparently fearful of being overheard.  Her
large, dark, lustrous eyes have in them an expression of apprehension;
her delicate lips are half parted; a sudden flush rises in her soft,
olive complexion as she examines every corner of the garden.  Having
completed her survey without discovering any cause for the suspicions
she seems to entertain, she again employs herself over her instrument.
Once more she strikes the chords, and now with a bolder hand.  The
notes she produces resolve themselves into a wild, plaintive, irregular
melody, alternately rising and sinking, as if swayed by the fickle
influence of a summer wind. These sounds are soon harmoniously
augmented by the young minstrel's voice, which is calm, still, and
mellow, and adapts itself with exquisite ingenuity to every arbitrary
variation in the tone of the accompaniment.  The song that she has
chosen is one of the fanciful odes of the day.  Its chief merit to her
lies in its alliance to the strange Eastern air which she heard at her
first interview with the senator who presented her with the lute.
Paraphrased in English, the words of the composition would run thus:--

THE ORIGIN OF MUSIC

I.

    Spirit, whose dominion reigns
    Over Music's thrilling strains,
    Whence may be thy distant birth?
    Say what tempted thee to earth?

    Mortal, listen: I was born
    In Creation's early years,
    Singing, 'mid the stars of morn,
    To the music of the spheres.

    Once as, within the realms of space,
    I view'd this mortal planet roll,
    A yearning towards they hapless race,
    Unbidden, filled my seraph soul!

    Angels, who had watched my birth,
    Heard me sigh to sing to earth;
    'Twas transgression ne'er forgiv'n
    To forget my native Heav'n;
    So they sternly bade me go--
    Banish'd to the world below.


II.

    Exil'd here, I knew no fears;
    For, though darkness round me clung,
    Though none heard me in the spheres,
    Earth had listeners while I sung.

    Young spirits of the Spring sweet breeze
    Came thronging round me, soft and coy,
    Light wood-nymphs sported in the trees,
    And laughing Echo leapt for joy!

    Brooding Woe and writhing Pain
    Soften'd at my gentle strain;
    Bounding Joy, with footstep fleet,
    Ran to nestle at my feet;
    While, aroused, delighted Love
    Softly kiss'd me from above!


III.

    Since those years of early time,
    Faithful still to earth I've sung;
    Flying through each distant clime,
    Ever welcome, ever young!

    Still pleas'd, my solace I impart
    Where brightest hopes are scattered dead;
    'Tis mine--sweet gift!--to charm the heart,
    Though all its other joys have fled!

    Time, that withers all beside,
    Harmless past me loves to glide;
    Change, that mortals must obey,
    Ne'er shall shake my gentle sway;
    Still 'tis mine all hearts to move
    In eternity of love.

As the last sounds of her voice and her lute died softly away upon the
still night air, an indescribable elevation appeared in the girl's
countenance.  She looked up rapturously into the far, star-bright sky;
her lip quivered, her dark eyes filled with tears, and her bosom heaved
with the excess of the emotions that the music and the scene inspired.
Then she gazed slowly around her, dwelling tenderly upon the fragrant
flower-beds that were the work of her own hands, and looking forth with
an expression half reverential, half ecstatic over the long, smooth,
shining plains, and the still, glorious mountains, that had so long
been the inspiration of her most cherished thoughts, and that now
glowed before her eyes, soft and beautiful as her dreams on her virgin
couch. Then, overpowered by the artless thoughts and innocent
recollections which on the magic wings of Nature and Night came wafted
over her mind, she bent down her head upon her lute, pressed her round,
dimpled cheek against its smooth frame, and drawing her fingers
mechanically over its strings, abandoned herself unreservedly to the
reveries of maidenhood and youth.

Such was the being devoted by her father's fatal ambition to a lifelong
banishment from all that is attractive in human art and beautiful in
human intellect!  Such was the daughter whose existence was to be one
long acquaintance with mortal woe, one unvaried refusal of mortal
pleasure, whose thoughts were to be only of sermons and fasts, whose
action were to be confined to the binding up of strangers' wounds and
the drying of strangers' tears; whose life, in brief, was doomed to be
the embodiment of her father's austere ideal of the austere virgins of
the ancient Church!

Deprived of her mother, exiled from the companionship of others of her
age, permitted no familiarity with any living being, no sympathies with
any other heart, commanded but never indulged, rebuked but never
applauded, she must have sunk beneath the severities imposed on her by
her father, but for the venial disobedience committed in the pursuit of
the solitary pleasure procured for her by her lute.  Vainly, in her
hours of study, did she read the fierce anathemas against love,
liberty, and pleasure, poetry, painting, and music, gold, silver, and
precious stones, which the ancient fathers had composed for the benefit
of the submissive congregations of former days; vainly did she imagine,
during those long hours of theological instruction, that her heart's
forbidden longings were banished and destroyed--that her patient and
childlike disposition was bowed in complete subserviency to the most
rigorous of her father's commands.  No sooner were her interviews with
Numerian concluded than the promptings of that nature within us, which
artifice may warp but can never destroy, lured her into a forgetfulness
of all that she had heard and a longing for much that was forbidden.
We live, in this existence, but by the companionship of some sympathy,
aspiration, or pursuit, which serves us as our habitual refuge from the
tribulations we inherit from the outer world. The same feeling which
led Antonina in her childhood to beg for a flower-garden, in her
girlhood induced her to gain possession of a lute.

The passion for music which prompted her visit to Vetranio, which alone
saved her affections from pining in the solitude imposed on them, and
which occupied her leisure hours in the manner we have already
described, was an inheritance of her birth.


Her Spanish mother had sung to her, hour after hour, in her cradle, for
the short time during which she was permitted to watch over her child.
The impression thus made on the dawning faculties of the infant,
nothing ever effaced.  Though her earliest perception were greeted only
by the sight of her father's misery; though the form which his
despairing penitence soon assumed doomed her to a life of seclusion and
an education of admonition, the passionate attachment to the melody of
sound, inspired by her mother's voice--almost imbibed at her mother's
breast--lived through all neglect, and survived all opposition.  It
found its nourishment in childish recollections, in snatches of street
minstrelsy heard through her window, in the passage of the night winds
of winter through the groves on the Pincian Mount, and received its
rapturous gratification in the first audible sounds from the Roman
senator's lute.  How her possession of an instrument, and her skill in
playing, were subsequently gained, the reader already knows from
Vetranio's narrative at Ravenna.  Could the frivolous senator have
discovered the real intensity of the emotions his art was raising in
his pupil's bosom while he taught her; could he have imagined how
incessantly, during their lessons, her sense of duty struggled with her
love for music--how completely she was absorbed, one moment by an agony
of doubt and fear, another by an ecstasy of enjoyment and hope--he
would have felt little of that astonishment at her coldness towards
himself which he so warmly expressed at his interview with Julia in the
gardens of the Court.  In truth, nothing could be more complete than
Antonina's childish unconsciousness of the feelings with which Vetranio
regarded her.  In entering his presence, whatever remnant of her
affections remained unwithered by her fears was solely attracted and
engrossed by the beloved and beautiful lute.  In receiving the
instrument, she almost forgot the giver in the triumph of possession;
or, if she thought of him at all, it was to be grateful for having
escaped uninjured from a member of that class, for whom her father's
reiterated admonitions had inspired her with a vague feeling of dread
and distrust, and to determine that, now she had acknowledged his
kindness and departed from his domains, nothing should ever induce her
to risk discovery by her father and peril to herself by ever entering
them again.

Innocent in her isolation, almost infantine in her natural simplicity,
a single enjoyment was sufficient to satisfy all the passions of her
age. Father, mother, lover, and companion; liberties, amusements, and
adornments--they were all summed up for her in that simple lute.  The
archness, the liveliness, and the gentleness of her disposition; the
poetry of her nature, and the affection of her heart; the happy bloom
of youth, which seclusion could not all wither nor distorted precept
taint, were now entirely nourished, expanded, and freshened--such is
the creative power of human emotion--by that inestimable possession.
She could speak to it, smile on it, caress it, and believe, in the
ecstasy of her delight, in the carelessness of her self-delusion, that
it sympathised with her joy.  During her long solitudes, when she was
silently watched in her father's absence by the brooding, melancholy
stranger whom he had set over her, it became a companion dearer than
the flower-garden, dearer even that the plains and mountains which
formed her favourite view.  When her father returned, and she was led
forth to sit in a dark place among strange, silent people, and to
listen to interminable declamations, it was a solace to think of the
instrument as it lay hidden securely in her chamber, and to ponder
delightedly on what new music of her own she could play upon it next.
And then, when evening arrived, and she was left alone in her
garden--then came the hour of moonlight and song; the moment of rapture
and melody that drew her out of herself, elevated her she felt not how,
and transported her she knew not whither.

But, while we thus linger over reflection on motives and examinations
into character, we are called back to the outer world of passing
interests and events by the appearances of another figure on the scene.
We left Antonina in the garden thinking over her lute.  She still
remains in her meditative position, but she is now no longer alone.

From the same steps by which she had descended, a man now advances into
the garden, and walks towards the place she occupies.  His gait is
limping, his stature crooked, his proportions distorted.  His large,
angular features stand out in gaunt contrast to his shrivelled cheeks.
His dry, matted hair has been burnt by the sun into a strange tawny
brown.  His expression is one of fixed, stern, mournful thought.  As he
steps stealthily along, advancing towards Antonina, he mutters to
himself, and clutches mechanically at his garments with his lank,
shapeless fingers. The radiant moonlight, falling fully upon his
countenance, invests it with a livid, mysterious, spectral appearance:
seen by a stranger at the present moment, he would have been almost
awful to look upon.

This was the man who had intercepted Vetranio on his journey home, and
who had now hurried back so as to regain his accustomed post before his
master's return, for he was the same individual mentioned by Numerian
as his aged convert, Ulpius, in his interview with the landholder at
the Basilica of St. Peter.

When Ulpius had arrived within a few paces of the girl he stopped,
saying in a hoarse, thick voice--

'Hide your toy--Numerian is at the gates!'


Antonina started violently as she listened to those repulsive accents.
The blood rushed into her cheeks; she hastily covered the lute with her
robe; paused an instant, as if intending to speak to the man, then
shuddered violently, and hurried towards the house.

As she mounted the steps Numerian met her in the hall.  There was now
no chance of hiding the lute in its accustomed place.

'You stay too late in the garden,' said the father, looking proudly, in
spite of all his austerity, upon his beautiful daughter as she stood by
his side.  'But what affects you?' he added, noticing her confusion.
'You tremble; your colour comes and goes; your lips quiver.  Give me
your hand!'

As Antonina obeyed him, a fold of the treacherous robe slipped aside,
and discovered a part of the frame of the lute.  Numerian's quick eye
discovered it immediately.  He snatched the instrument from her feeble
grasp.  His astonishment on beholding it was too great for words, and
for an instant he confronted the poor girl, whose pale face looked
rigid with terror, in ominous and expressive silence.

'This thing,' said he at length, 'this invention of libertines in my
house--in my daughter's possession!' and he dashed the lute into
fragments on the floor.

For one moment Antonina looked incredulously on the ruins of the
beloved companion, which was the centre of all her happiest
expectations for future days.  Then, as she began to estimate the
reality of her deprivation, her eyes lost all their heaven-born
brightness, and filled to overflowing with the tears of earth.

'To your chamber!' thundered Numerian, as she knelt, sobbing
convulsively, over those hapless fragments.  'To your chamber!
Tomorrow shall bring this mystery of iniquity to light!'

She rose humbly to obey him, for indignation had no part in the
emotions that shook her gentle and affectionate nature.  As she moved
towards the room that no lute was henceforth to occupy, as she thought
on the morrow that no lute was henceforth to enliven, her grief almost
overpowered her.  She turned back and looked imploringly at her father,
as if entreating permission to pick up even the smallest of the
fragments at his feet.

'To your chamber!' he reiterated sternly.  'Am I to be disobeyed to my
face?'

Without any repetition of her silent remonstrance, she instantly
retired.  As soon as she was out of sight, Ulpius ascended the steps
and stood before the angered father.

'Look, Ulpius,' cried Numerian, 'my daughter, whom I have so carefully
cherished, whom I intended for an example to the world, has deceived
me, even thus!'

He pointed, as he spoke, to the ruins of the unfortunate lute; but
Ulpius did not address to him a word in reply, and he hastily
continued:--

'I will not sully the solemn offices of tonight by interrupting them
with my worldly affairs. To-morrow I will interrogate my disobedient
child.  In the meantime, do not imagine, Ulpius, that I connect you in
any way with this wicked and unworthy deception!  In you I have every
confidence, in your faithfulness I have every hope.'

Again he paused, and again Ulpius kept silence.  Any one less agitated,
less confiding, than his unsuspicious master, would have remarked that
a faint sinister smile was breaking forth upon his haggard countenance.
But Numerian's indignation was still too violent to permit him to
observed, and, spite of his efforts to control himself, he again broke
forth in complaint.


'On this night too, of all others,' cried he, 'when I had hoped to lead
her among my little assembly of the faithful, to join in their prayers,
and to listen to my exhortations--on this night I am doomed to find her
a player on a pagan lute, a possessor of the most wanton of the world's
vanities!  God give me patience to worship this night with unwandering
thoughts, for my heart is vexed at the transgression of my child, as
the heart of Eli of old at the iniquities of his sons!'

He was moving rapidly away, when, as if struck with a sudden
recollection, he stopped abruptly, and again addressed his gloomy
companion.

'I will go by myself to the chapel to-night,' said he.  'You, Ulpius,
will stay to keep watch over my disobedient child.  Be vigilant, good
friend, over my house; for even now, on my return, I thought that two
strangers were following my steps, and I forebode some evil in store
for me as the chastisement for my sins, even greater than this misery
of my daughter's transgression.  Be watchful, good Ulpius--be watchful!'

And, as he hurried away, the stern, serious man felt as overwhelmed at
the outrage that had been offered to his gloomy fanaticism, as the
weak, timid girl at the destruction that had been wreaked upon her
harmless lute.

After Numerian had departed, the sinister smile again appeared on the
countenance of Ulpius. He stood for a short time fixed in thought, and
then began slowly to descend a staircase near him which led to some
subterranean apartments.  He had not gone far when a slight noise
became audible at an extremity of the corridor above.  As he listened
for a repetition of the sound, he heard a sob, and looking cautiously
up, discovered, by the moonlight, Antonina stepping cautiously along
the marble pavement of the hall.

She held in her hand a little lamp; her small, rosy feet were
uncovered; the tears still streamed over her cheeks.  She advanced with
the greatest caution (as if fearful of being overheard) until she
gained the part of the floor still strewn with the ruins of the broken
lute.  Here she knelt down, and pressed each fragment that lay before
her separately to her lips.  Then hurriedly concealing a single piece
in her bosom, she arose and stole quickly away in the direction by
which she had come.

'Be patient till the dawn,' muttered her faithless guardian, gazing
after her from his concealment as she disappeared; 'it will bring to
thy lute a restorer, and to Ulpius an ally!'



CHAPTER 6.

AN APPRENTICESHIP TO THE TEMPLE.

The action of our characters during the night included in the last two
chapters has now come to a pause.  Vetranio is awaiting his guests for
the banquet; Numerian is in the chapel, preparing for the discourse
that he is to deliver to his friends; Ulpius is meditating in his
master's house; Antonina is stretched upon her couch, caressing the
precious fragment that she had saved from the ruins of her lute.  All
the immediate agents of our story are, for the present, in repose.

It is our purpose to take advantage of this interval of inaction, and
direct the reader's attention to a different country from that selected
as the scene of our romance, and to such historical events of past
years as connect themselves remarkably with the early life of
Numerian's perfidious convert.  This man will be found a person of
great importance in the future conduct of our story.  It is necessary
to the comprehension of his character, and the penetration of such of
his purposes as have been already hinted at, and may subsequently
appear, that the long course of his existence should be traced upwards
to its source.

It was in the reign of Julian, when the gods of the Pagan achieved
their last victory over the Gospel of the Christian, that a decently
attired man, leading by the hand a handsome boy of fifteen years of
age, entered the gates of Alexandria, and proceeded hastily towards the
high priest's dwelling in the Temple of Serapis.


After a stay of some hours at his destination, the man left the city
alone as hastily as he entered it, and was never after seen at
Alexandria.  The boy remained in the abode of the high priest until the
next day, when he was solemnly devoted to the service of the temple.

The boy was the young Emilius, afterwards called Ulpius.  He was nephew
to the high priest, to whom he had been confided by his father, a
merchant of Rome.

Ambition was the ruling passion of the father of Emilius.  It had
prompted him to aspire to every distinction granted to the successful
by the state, but it had not gifted him with the powers requisite to
turn his aspirations in any instance into acquisitions.  He passed
through existence a disappointed man, planning but never performing,
seeing his more fortunate brother rising to the highest distinction in
the priesthood, and finding himself irretrievably condemned to exist in
the affluent obscurity ensured to him by his mercantile pursuits.

When his brother Macrinus, on Julian's accession to the imperial
throne, arrived at the pinnacle of power and celebrity as high priest
of the Temple of Serapis, the unsuccessful merchant lost all hope of
rivalling his relative in the pursuit of distinction.  His insatiable
ambition, discarded from himself, now settled on one of his infant
sons.  He determined that his child should be successful where he had
failed.  Now that his brother had secured the highest elevation in the
temple, no calling could offer more direct advantages to a member of
his household that the priesthood.  His family had been from their
earliest origin rigid Pagans.  One of them had already attained to the
most distinguished honours of his gorgeous worship.  He determined that
another should rival his kinsman, and that that other should be his
eldest son.

Firm in this resolution, he at once devoted his child to the great
design which he now held continually in view.  He knew well that
Paganism, revived though it was, was not the universal worship that it
had been; that it was now secretly resisted, and might soon be openly
opposed, by the persecuted Christians throughout the Empire; and that
if the young generation were to guard it successfully from all future
encroachments, and to rise securely to its highest honours, more must
be exacted from them than the easy attachment to the ancient religion
require from the votaries of former days.  Then, the performance of the
most important offices in the priesthood was compatible with the
possession of military or political rank.  Now, it was to the temple,
and to the temple only, that the future servant of the gods should be
devoted.  Resolving thus, the father took care that all the son's
occupations and rewards should, from his earliest years, be in some way
connected with the career for which he was intended.  His childish
pleasures were to be conducted to sacrifices and auguries; his childish
playthings and prizes were images of the deities.  No opposition was
offered on the boy's part to this plan of education.  Far different
from his younger brother, whose turbulent disposition defied all
authority, he was naturally docile; and his imagination, vivid beyond
his years, was easily led captive by any remarkable object presented to
it.  With such encouragement, his father became thoroughly engrossed by
the occupation of forming him for his future existence.  His mother's
influence over him was jealously watched; the secret expression of her
love, of her sorrow, at the prospect of parting with him, was
ruthlessly suppressed whenever it was discovered; and his younger
brother was neglected, almost forgotten, in order that the parental
watchfulness might be entirely and invariably devoted to the eldest son.

When Emilius had numbered fifteen years, his father saw with delight
that the time had come when he could witness the commencement of the
realisation of all his projects.  The boy was removed from home, taken
to Alexandria, and gladly left, by his proud and triumphant father,
under the especial guardianship of Macrinus, the high priest.


The chief of the temple full sympathised in his brother's designs for
the young Emilius.  As soon as the boy had entered on his new
occupations, he was told that he must forget all that he had left
behind him at Rome; that he must look upon the high priest as his
father, and upon the temple, henceforth, as his home; and that the sole
object of his present labours and future ambition must be to rise in
the service of the gods.  Nor did Macrinus stop here.  So thoroughly
anxious was he to stand to his pupil in the place of a parent, and to
secure his allegiance by withdrawing him in every way from the world in
which he had hitherto lived, that he even changed his name, giving to
him one of his own appellations, and describing it as a privilege to
stimulate him to future exertions.  From the boy Emilius, he was now
permanently transformed to the student Ulpius.

With such a natural disposition as we have already described, and under
such guardianship as that of the high priest, there was little danger
that Ulpius would disappoint the unusual expectations which had been
formed of him.  His attention to his new duties never relaxed; his
obedience to his new masters never wavered.  Whatever Macrinus demanded
of him he was sure to perform.  Whatever longings he might feel to
return to home, he never discovered them; he never sought to gratify
the tastes naturally peculiar to his age.  The high priest and his
colleagues were astonished at the extraordinary readiness with which
the boy himself forwarded their intentions for him.  Had they known how
elaborately he had been prepared for his future employments at his
father's house, they would have been less astonished at their pupil's
unusual docility.  Trained as he had been, he must have shown a more
than human perversity had he displayed any opposition to his uncle's
wishes.  He had been permitted no childhood either of thought or
action. His natural precocity had been seized as the engine to force
his faculties into a perilous and unwholesome maturity; and when his
new duties demanded his attention, he entered on them with the same
sincerity of enthusiasm which his boyish coevals would have exhibited
towards a new sport.  His gradual initiation into the mysteries of his
religion created a strange, voluptuous sensation of fear and interest
in his mind.  He heard the oracles, and he trembled; he attended the
sacrifices and the auguries, and he wondered.  All the poetry of the
bold and beautiful superstition to which he was devoted flowed
overwhelmingly into his young heart, absorbing the service of his fresh
imagination, and transporting him incessantly from the vital realities
of the outer world to the shadowy regions of aspiration and thought.


But his duties did not entirely occupy the attention of Ulpius.  The
boy had his peculiar pleasures as well as his peculiar occupations.
When his employments were over for the day, it was a strange,
unearthly, vital enjoyment to him to wander softly in the shade of the
temple porticoes, looking down from his great mysterious eminence upon
the populous and sun-brightened city at his feet; watching the
brilliant expanse of the waters of the Nile glittering joyfully in the
dazzling and pervading light; raising his eyes from the fields and
woods, the palaces and garden, that stretched out before him below, to
the lovely and cloudless sky that watched round him afar and above, and
that awoke all that his new duties had left of the joyfulness, the
affectionate sensibility, which his rare intervals of uninterrupted
intercourse with his mother had implanted in his heart.  Then, when the
daylight began to wane, and the moon and stars already grew beautiful
in their places in the firmament, he would pass into the subterranean
vaults of the edifice, trembling as his little taper scarcely dispelled
the dull, solemn gloom, and listening with breathless attention for the
voices of those guardian spirits whose fabled habitation was made in
the apartments of the sacred place.  Or, when the multitude had
departed for their amusements and their homes, he would steal into the
lofty halls and wander round the pedestals of the mighty statues,
breathing fearfully the still atmosphere of the temple, and watching
the passage of the cold, melancholy moonbeams through the openings in
the roof, and over the colossal limbs and features of the images of the
pagan gods. Sometimes, when the services of Serapis and the cares
attendant on his communications with the Emperor were concluded,
Macrinus would lead his pupil into the garden of the priests, and
praise him for his docility till his heart throbbed with gratitude and
pride.  Sometimes he would convey him cautiously outside the precincts
of the sacred place, and show him, in the suburbs of the city, silent,
pale, melancholy men, gliding suspiciously through the gay, crowded
streets.  Those fugitive figures, he would declare, were the enemies of
the temple and all that it contained; conspirators against the Emperor
and the gods; wretches who were to be driven forth as outcasts from
humanity; whose appellation was 'Christian'; and whose impious worship,
if tolerated, would deprive him of the uncle whom he loved, of the
temple that he reverenced, and of the priestly dignity and renown which
it should be his life's ambition to acquire.

Thus tutored in his duties by his guardian, and in his recreations by
himself, as time wore on, the boy gradually lost every remaining
characteristic of his age.  Even the remembrance of his mother and his
mother's love grew faint on his memory.  Serious, solitary, thoughtful,
he lived but to succeed in the temple; he laboured but to emulate the
high priest.  All his feelings and faculties were now enslaved by an
ambition, at once unnatural at his present age, and ominous of
affliction for his future life.  The design that Macrinus had
contemplated as the work of years was perfected in a few months.  The
hope that his father had scarce dared to entertain for his manhood was
already accomplished in his youth.

In these preparations for future success passed three years of the life
of Ulpius.  At the expiration of that period the death of Julian
darkened the brilliant prospects of the Pagan world.  Scarcely had the
priests of Serapis recovered the first shock of astonishment and grief
consequent upon the fatal news of the vacancy in the imperial throne,
when the edict of toleration issued by Jovian, the new Emperor, reached
the city of Alexandria, and was elevated on the walls of the temple.

The first sight of this proclamation (permitting freedom of worship to
the Christians) aroused in the highly wrought disposition of Ulpius the
most violent emotions of anger and contempt. The enthusiasm of his
character and age, guided invariably in the one direction of his
worship, took the character of the wildest fanaticism when he
discovered the Emperor's careless infringement of the supremacy of the
temple.  He volunteered in the first moments of his fury to tear down
the edict from the walls, to lead an attack on the meetings of the
triumphant Christians, or to travel to the imperial abode and exhort
Jovian to withdraw his act of perilous leniency ere it was too late.
With difficulty did his more cautious confederates restrain him from
the execution of his impetuous designs.  For two days he withdrew
himself from his companions, and brooded in solitude over the injury
offered to his beloved superstition, and the prospective augmentation
of the influence of the Christian sect.

But the despair of the young enthusiast was destined to be further
augmented by a private calamity, at once mysterious in its cause and
overwhelming in its effect.  Two days after the publication of the
edict the high priest Macrinus, in the prime of vigour and manhood,
suddenly died.

To narrate the confusion and horror within and without the temple on
the discovery of this fatal even; to describe the execrations and
tumults of the priests and the populace, who at once suspected the
favoured and ambitious Christians of causing, by poison, the death of
their spiritual ruler, might be interesting as a history of the manners
of the times, but is immaterial to the object of this chapter.  We
prefer rather to trace the effect on the mind of Ulpius of his personal
and private bereavement; of this loss--irretrievable to him--of the
master whom he loved and the guardian whom it was his privilege to
revere.


An illness of some months, during the latter part of which his
attendants trembled for his life and reason, sufficiently attested the
sincerity of the grief of Ulpius for the loss of his protector. During
his paroxysms of delirium the priests who watched round his bed drew
from his ravings many wise conclusions as to the effects that his
seizure and its causes were likely to produce on his future character;
but, in spite of all their penetration, they were still far from
appreciating to a tithe of its extent the revolution that his
bereavement had wrought in his disposition.  The boy himself, until the
moment of the high priest's death, had never been aware of the depth of
his devotion to his second father.  Warped as they had been by his
natural parent, the affectionate qualities that were the mainspring of
his nature had never been entirely destroyed; and they seized on every
kind word and gentle action of Macrinus as food which had been grudged
them since their birth.  Morally and intellectually, Macrinus had been
to him the beacon that pointed the direction of his course, the judge
that regulated his conduct, the Muse that he looked to for inspiration.
And now, when this link which had connected every ramification of his
most cherished and governing ideas was suddenly snapped asunder, a
desolation sunk down upon his mind which at once paralysed its
elasticity and withered its freshness.  He glanced back, and saw
nothing but a home from whose pleasures and affections his father's
ambition had exiled him for ever.  He looked forward, and as he thought
of his unfitness, both from character and education, to mix in the
world as others mixed in it, he saw no guiding star of social happiness
for the conduct of his existence to come.  There was now no resource
left for him but entirely to deliver himself up to those pursuits which
had made his home as a strange place to him, which were hallowed by
their connection with the lost object of his attachment, and which
would confer the sole happiness and distinction that he could hope for
in the wide world on his future life.

In addition to this motive for labour in his vocation, there existed in
the mind of Ulpius a deep and settled feeling that animated him with
unceasing ardour for the prosecution of his cherished occupations.
This governing principle was detestation of the Christian sect.  The
suspicion that others had entertained regarding the death of the high
priest was to his mind a certainty.  He rejected every idea which
opposed his determined persuasion that the jealousy of the Christians
had prompted them to the murder, by poison, of the most powerful and
zealous of the Pagan priests.  To labour incessantly until he attained
the influence and position formerly enjoyed by his relative, and to use
that influence and position, when once acquired, as the means of
avenging Macrinus, by sweeping every vestige of the Christian faith
from the face of the earth, were now the settled purposes of his heart.
Inspired by his determination with the deliberate wisdom which is in
most men the result only of the experience of years, he employed the
first days of his convalescence in cautiously maturing his future
plans, and impartially calculating his chances of success.  This
self-examination completed, he devoted himself at once and for ever to
his life's great design.  Nothing wearied, nothing discouraged, nothing
impeded him.  Outward events passed by him unnoticed; the city's
afflictions and the city's triumphs spoke no longer to his heart.  Year
succeeded to year, but Time had no tongue for him.  Paganism gradually
sank, and Christianity imperceptibly rose, but change spread no picture
before his eyes.  The whole outward world was a void to him, until the
moment arrived that beheld him successful in his designs.  His
preparations for the future absorbed every faculty of his nature, and
left him, as to the present, a mere automaton, reflecting no principle,
and animated by no event--a machine that moved, but did not perceive--a
body that acted, without a mind that thought.

Returning for a moment to the outward world, we find that on the death
of Jovian, in 364, Valentinian, the new Emperor, continued the system
of toleration adopted by his predecessor. On his death, in 375,
Gratian, the successor to the imperial throne, so far improved on the
example of the two former potentates as to range himself boldly on the
side of the partisans of the new faith.  Not content with merely
encouraging, both by precept and by example, the growth of
Christianity, the Emperor further testified to his zeal for the rising
religion by inflicting incessant persecutions upon the rapidly
decreasing advocates of the ancient worship; serving, by these acts of
his reign, as pioneer to his successor, Theodosius the Great, in the
religious revolution which that illustrious opponent of Paganism was
destined to effect.


The death of Gratian, in 383, saw Ulpius enrolled among the chief
priests of the temple, and pointed out as the next inheritor of the
important office once held by the powerful and active Macrinus.
Beholding himself thus secure of the distinction for which he had
laboured, the aspiring priest found leisure, at length, to look forth
upon the affairs of the passing day.  From every side desolation
darkened the prospect that he beheld.  Already, throughout many
provinces of the Empire, the temples of the gods had been overthrown by
the destructive zeal of the triumphant Christians.  Already hosts of
the terrified people, fearing that the fate of their idols might
ultimately be their own, finding themselves deserted by their disbanded
priests, and surrounded by the implacable enemies of the ancient faith,
had renounced their worship for the sake of saving their lives and
securing their property.  On the wide field of Pagan ruin there now
rose but one structure entirely unimpaired.  The Temple of Serapis
still reared its head--unshaken, unbending, unpolluted.  Here the
sacrifice still prospered and the people still bowed in worship. Before
this monument of the religious glories of ages, even the rising power
of Christian supremacy quailed in dismay.  Though the ranks of its once
multitudinous congregations were now perceptibly thinned, though the
new churches swarmed with converts, though the edicts from Rome
denounced it as a blot on the face of the earth, its gloomy and
solitary grandeur was still preserved.  No unhallowed foot trod its
secret recesses; no destroying hand was raised as yet against its
ancient and glorious walls.

Indignation, but not despondency, filled the heart of Ulpius as he
surveyed the situation of the Pagan world.  A determination nourished
as his had been by the reflections of years, and matured by incessant
industry of deliberation, is above all those shocks which affect a
hasty decision or destroy a wavering intention.  Impervious to failure,
disasters urge it into action, but never depress it to repose.  Its
existence is the air that preserves the vitality of the mind--the
spring that moves the action of the thoughts.  Never for a moment did
Ulpius waver in his devotion to his great design, or despair of its
ultimate execution and success.  Though every succeeding day brought
the news of fresh misfortunes for the Pagans and fresh triumphs for the
Christians, still, with a few of his more zealous comrades, he
persisted in expecting the advent of another Julian, and a day of
restoration for the dismantled shrines of the deities that he served.
While the Temple of Serapis stood uninjured, to give encouragement to
his labours and refuge to his persecuted brethren, there existed for
him such an earnest of success as would spur him to any exertion, and
nerve him against any peril.

And now, to the astonishment of priests and congregations, the silent,
thoughtful, solitary Ulpius suddenly started from his long repose, and
stood forth the fiery advocate of the rights of his invaded worship.
In a few days the fame of his addresses to the Pagans who still
attended the rites of Serapis spread throughout the whole city.  The
boldest among the Christians, as they passed the temple walls,
involuntarily trembled when they heard the vehemence of the applause
which arose from the audience of the inspired priest.  Addressed to all
varieties of age and character, these harangues woke an echo in every
breast they reached.  To the young they were clothed in all the poetry
of the worship for which they pleaded.  They dwelt on the altars of
Venus that the Christians would lay waste; on the woodlands that the
Christians would disenchant of their Dryads; on the hallowed Arts that
the Christians would arise and destroy.  To the aged they called up
remembrances of the glories of the past achieved through the favour of
the gods; of ancestors who had died in their service; of old forgotten
loves, and joys, and successes that had grown and prospered under the
gentle guardianship of the deities of old--while the unvarying burden
of their conclusion to all was the reiterated assertion that the
illustrious Macrinus had died a victim to the toleration of the
Christian sect.


But the efforts of Ulpius were not confined to the delivery of
orations. Every moment of his leisure time was dedicated to secret
pilgrimages into Alexandria.  Careless of peril, regardless of threats,
the undaunted enthusiast penetrated into the most private
meeting-places of the Christians; reclaiming on every side apostates to
the Pagan creed, and defying the hostility of half the city from the
stronghold of the temple walls.  Day after day fresh recruits arrived
to swell the ranks of the worshippers of Serapis.  The few members of
the scattered congregations of the provinces who still remained
faithful to the ancient worship were gathered together in Alexandria by
the private messengers of the unwearied Ulpius.  Already tumults began
to take place between the Pagans and the Christians; and even now the
priest of Serapis prepared to address a protest to the new Emperor in
behalf of the ancient religion of the land.  At this moment it seemed
probable that the heroic attempts of one man to prop the structure of
superstition, whose foundations were undermined throughout, and whose
walls were attacked by brigands, might actually be crowned with success.

But Time rolled on; and with him came inexorable change, trampling over
the little barriers set up against it by human opposition, and erecting
its strange and transitory fabrics triumphantly in their stead.  In
vain did the devoted priest exert all his powers to augment and combine
his scattered band; in vain did the mighty temple display its ancient
majesty, its gorgeous sacrifices, its mysterious auguries.  The spirit
of Christianity was forth for triumph on the earth--the last destinies
of Paganism were fast accomplishing.  Yet a few seasons more of
unavailing resistance passed by, and then the Archbishop of Alexandria
issued his decree that the Temple of Serapis should be destroyed.

At the rumour of their Primate's determination, the Christian fanatics
rose by swarms from every corner of Egypt, and hurried into Alexandria
to be present at the work of demolition. From the arid solitudes of the
desert, from their convents on rocks and their caverns in the earth,
hosts of rejoicing monks flew to the city gates, and ranged themselves
with the soldiery and the citizens, impatient for the assault.  At the
dawn of morning this assembly of destroyers was convened, and as the
sun rose over Alexandria they arrived before the temple walls.

The gates of the glorious structure were barred; the walls were crowded
with their Pagan defenders.  A still, dead, mysterious silence reigned
over the whole edifice; and, of all the men who thronged it, one only
moved from his appointed place--one only wandered incessantly from
point to point, wherever the building was open to assault.  Those among
the besiegers who were nearest the temple saw in this presiding genius
of the preparations for defence the object at once of their most
malignant hatred and their most ungovernable dread--Ulpius the priest.

As soon as the Archbishop gave the signal for the assault, a band of
monks--their harsh, discordant voices screaming fragments of psalms,
their tattered garments waving in the air, their cadaverous faces
gleaming with ferocious joy--led the way, placed the first ladders
against the walls, and began the attack.  From all sides the temple was
assailed by the infuriated besiegers, and on all sides it was
successfully defended by the resolute besieged.  Shock after shock fell
upon the massive gates without forcing them to recede; missile after
missile was hurled at the building, but no breach was made in its solid
surface.  Multitudes scaled the walls, gained the outer porticoes, and
slaughtered their Pagan defenders, but were incessantly repulsed in
their turn ere they could make their advantage good.  Over and over
again did the assailants seem on the point of storming the temple
successfully, but the figure of Ulpius, invariably appearing at the
critical moment among his disheartened followers, acted like a fatality
in destroying the effect of the most daring exertions and the most
important triumphs.  Wherever there was danger, wherever there was
carnage, wherever there was despair, thither strode the undaunted
priest, inspiring the bold, succouring the wounded, reanimating the
feeble.  Blinded by no stratagem, wearied by no fatigue, there was
something almost demoniac in his activity for destruction, in his
determination under defeat.  The besiegers marked his course round the
temple by the calamities that befell them at his every step.  If the
bodies of slaughtered Christians were flung down upon them from the
walls, they felt that Ulpius was there.  If the bravest of the soldiery
hesitated at mounting the ladders, it was known that Ulpius was
directing the defeat of their comrades above.  If a sally from the
temple drove back the advanced guard upon the reserves in the rear, it
was pleaded as their excuse that Ulpius was fighting at the head of his
Pagan bands.  Crowd on crowd of Christian warriors still pressed
forward to the attack; but though the ranks of the unbelievers were
perceptibly thinned, though the gates that defended them at last began
to quiver before the reiterated blows by which they were assailed,
every court of the sacred edifice yet remained in the possession of the
besieged, and was at the disposal of the unconquered captain who
organised the defence.


Depressed by the failure of his efforts, and horrified at the carnage
already perpetrated among his adherents, the Archbishop suddenly
commanded a cessation of hostilities, and proposed to the defenders of
the temple a short and favourable truce.  After some delay, and
apparently at the expense of some discord among their ranks, the Pagans
sent to the Primate an assurance of their acceptance of his terms,
which were that both parties should abstain from any further struggle
for the ascendancy until an edict from Theodosius determining the
ultimate fate of the temple should be applied for and obtained.

The truce once agreed on, the wide space before the respited edifice
was gradually cleared of its occupants.  Slowly and sadly the
Archbishop and his followers departed from the ancient walls whose
summits they had assaulted in vain; and when the sun went down, of the
great multitude congregated in the morning a few corpses were all that
remained.  Within the sacred building, Death and Repose ruled with the
night, where morning had brightly glittered on Life and Action. The
wounded, the wearied, and the cold, all now lay hushed alike, fanned by
the night breezes that wandered through the lofty porticoes, or soothed
by the obscurity that reigned over the silent halls.  Among the ranks
of the Pagan devotees but one man still toiled and thought.  Round and
round the temple, restless as a wild beast that is threatened in his
lair, watchful as a lonely spirit in a city of strange tombs, wandered
the solitary and brooding Ulpius.  For him there was no rest of
body--no tranquility of mind.  On the events of the next few days
hovered the fearful chance that was soon, either for misery or
happiness, to influence irretrievably the years of his future life.
Round and round the mighty walls he watched with mechanical and useless
anxiety. Every stone in the building was eloquent to his lonely
heart--beautiful to his wild imagination. On those barren structures
stretched for him the loved and fertile home; there was the shrine for
whose glory his intellect had been enslaved, for whose honour his youth
had been sacrificed! Round and round the secret recesses and sacred
courts he paced with hurried footstep, cleansing with gentle and
industrious hand the stains of blood and the defilements of warfare
from the statues at his side.  Sad, solitary, thoughtful, as in the
first days of his apprenticeship to the gods, he now roved in the same
moonlit recesses where Macrinus had taught him in his youth.  As the
menacing tumults of the day had aroused his fierceness, so the
stillness of the quiet night awakened his gentleness.  He had combated
for the temple in the morning as a son for a parent, and he now watched
over it at night as a miser over his treasure, as a lover over his
mistress, as a mother over her child!

The days passed on; and at length the memorable morning arrived which
was to determine the fate of the last temple that Christian fanaticism
had spared to the admiration of the world.  At an early hour of the
morning the diminished numbers of the Pagan zealots met their
reinforced and determined opponents--both sides being alike unarmed--in
the great square of Alexandria.  The imperial prescript was then
publicly read. It began by assuring the Pagans that their priest's plea
for protection for the temple had received the same consideration which
had been bestowed on the petition against the gods presented by the
Christian Archbishop, and ended by proclaiming the commands of the
Emperor that Serapis and all other idols in Alexandria should
immediately be destroyed.

The shout of triumph which followed the conclusion of the imperial
edict still rose from the Christian ranks when the advanced guard of
the soldiers appointed to ensure the execution of the Emperor's designs
appeared in the square.  For a few minutes the forsaken Pagans stood
rooted to the spot where they had assembled, gazing at the warlike
preparations around them in a stupor of bewilderment and despair.  Then
as they recollected how diminished were their numbers, how arduous had
been their first defence against a few, and how impossible would be a
second defence against many--from the boldest to the feeblest, a panic
seized on them; and, regardless of Ulpius, regardless of honour,
regardless of the gods, they turned with one accord and fled from the
place.


With the flight of the Pagans the work of demolition began.  Even women
and children hurried to join in the welcome task of indiscriminate
destruction.  No defenders on this occasion barred the gates of the
temple to the Christian hosts.  The sublime solitude of the tenantless
building was outraged and invaded in an instant.  Statues were broken,
gold was carried off, doors were splintered into fragments; but here
for a while the progress of demolition was delayed.  Those to whom the
labour of ruining the outward structure had been confided were less
successful than their neighbours who had pillaged its contents.  The
ponderous stones of the pillars, the massive surfaces of the walls,
resisted the most vigorous of their puny efforts, and forced them to
remain contented with mutilating that which they could not
destroy--with tearing off roofs, defacing marbles, and demolishing
capitals.  The rest of the buildings remained uninjured, and grander
even now in the wildness of ruin than ever it had been in the
stateliness of perfection and strength.

But the most important achievement still remained, the death-wound of
Paganism was yet to be struck--the idol Serapis, which had ruled the
hearts of millions, and was renowned in the remotest corners of the
Empire, was to be destroyed!  A breathless silence pervaded the
Christian ranks as they filled the hall of the god.  A superstitious
dread, to which they had hitherto thought themselves superior, overcame
their hearts, as a single soldier, bolder than his fellows, mounted by
a ladder to the head of the colossal statue, and struck at its cheek
with an axe.  The blow had scarcely been dealt when a deep groan was
heard from the opposite wall of the apartment, succeeded by a noise of
retreating footsteps, and then all was silent again.  For a few minutes
this incident stayed the feet of those who were about to join their
companion in the mutilation of the idol; but after an interval their
hesitation vanished, they dealt blow after blow at the statue, and no
more groans followed--no more sounds were heard, save the wild echoes
of the stroke of hammer, crowbar, and club, resounding through the
lofty hall.  In an incredibly short space of time the image of Serapis
lay in great fragments on the marble floor.  The multitude seized on
the limbs of the idol and ran forth to drag them in triumph through the
streets. Yet a few minutes more, and the ruins were untenanted, the
temple was silent--Paganism was destroyed!

Throughout the ravaging course of the Christians over the temple, they
had been followed with dogged perseverance, and at the same time with
the most perfect impunity, by the only Pagan of all his brethren who
had not sought safety by flight.  This man, being acquainted with every
private passage and staircase in the sacred building, was enabled to be
secretly present at each fresh act of demolition, in whatever part of
the edifice it might be perpetrated.  From hall to hall, and from room
to room, he tracked with noiseless step and glaring eye the movements
of the Christian mob--now hiding himself behind a pillar, now passing
into concealed cavities in the walls, now looking down from
imperceptible fissures in the roof; but, whatever his situation,
invariably watching from it, with the same industry of attention and
the same silence of emotion, the minutest acts of spoliation committed
by the most humble follower of the Christian ranks.  It was only when
he entered with the victorious ravagers into the vast apartment
occupied by the idol Serapis that the man's countenance began to give
evidence of the agony under which his heart was writhing within him.
He mounted a private staircase cut in the hollow of the massive wall of
the room, and gaining a passage that ran round the extremities of the
ceiling, looked through a sort of lattice concealed in the ornaments of
the cornice.  As he gazed down and saw the soldier mounting, axe in
hand, to the idol's head, great drops of perspiration trickled from his
forehead.  His hot, thick breath hissed through his closed teeth, and
his hands strained at the strong metal supports of the lattice until
they bent beneath his grasp.  When the stroke descended on the image,
he closed his eyes.  When the fragment detached by the blow fell on the
floor, a groan burst from his quivering lips.  For one moment more he
glared down with a gaze of horror upon the multitude at his feet, and
then with frantic speed he descended the steep stairs by which he had
mounted to the roof, and fled from the temple.


The same night this man was again seen by some shepherds whom curiosity
led to visit the desecrated building, weeping bitterly in its ruined
and deserted porticoes.  As they approached to address him, he raised
his head, and with a supplicating action signed to them to leave the
place. For the few moments during which he confronted them, the
moonlight shone full upon his countenance, and the shepherds, who had
in former days attended the ceremonies of the temple, saw with
astonishment that the solitary mourner whose meditations they had
disturbed was no other than Ulpius the priest.

At the dawn of day these shepherds had again occasion to pass the walls
of the pillaged temple. Throughout the hours of the night the
remembrance of the scene of unsolaced, unpartaken grief that they had
beheld--of the awful loneliness of misery in which they had seen the
heart-broken and forsaken man, whose lightest words they had once
delighted to revere--inspired them with a feeling of pity for the
deserted Pagan, widely at variance with the spirit of persecution which
the spurious Christianity of their day would fain have instilled in the
bosoms of its humblest votaries.  Bent on consolation, anxious to
afford help, these men, like the Samaritan of old, went up at their own
peril to succour a brother in affliction.  They searched every portion
of the empty building, but the object of their sympathy was nowhere to
be seen. They called, but heard no answering sound, save the dirging of
the winds of early morning through the ruined halls, which but a short
time since had resounded with the eloquence of the once illustrious
priest.  Except a few night-birds, already sheltered by the deserted
edifice, not a living being moved in what was once the temple of the
Eastern world. Ulpius was gone.

These events took place in the year 389.  In 390, Pagan ceremonies were
made treason by the laws throughout the whole Roman Empire.

From that period the scattered few who still adhered to the ancient
faith became divided into three parties; each alike insignificant,
whether considered as openly or secretly inimical to the new religion
of the State at large.

The first party unsuccessfully endeavoured to elude the laws
prohibitory of sacrifices and divinations by concealing their religious
ceremonies under the form of convivial meetings.

The second preserved their ancient respect for the theory of Paganism,
but abandoned all hope and intention of ever again accomplishing its
practice.  By such timely concessions many were enabled to
preserve--and some even to attain--high and lucrative employments as
officers of the State.

The third retired to their homes, the voluntary exiles of every
religion; resigning the practice of their old worship as a necessity,
and shunning the communion of Christians as a matter of choice.

Such were the unimportant divisions into which the last remnants of the
once powerful Pagan community now subsided; but to none of them was the
ruined and degraded Ulpius ever attached.

For five weary years--dating from the epoch of the prohibition of
Paganism--he wandered through the Empire, visiting in every country the
ruined shrines of his deserted worship--a friendless, hopeless,
solitary man!


Throughout the whole of Europe, and all of Asia and the East that still
belonged to Rome, he bent his slow and toilsome course.  In the fertile
valleys of Gaul, over the burning sands of Africa, through the
sun-bright cities of Spain, he travelled--unfriended as a man under a
curse, lonely as a second Cain.  Never for an instant did the
remembrance of his ruined projects desert his memory, or his mad
determination to revive his worship abandon his mind.  At every relic
of Paganism, however slight, that he encountered on his way, he found a
nourishment for his fierce anguish, and employment for his vengeful
thoughts. Often, in the little villages, children were frightened from
their sports in a deserted temple by the apparition of his gaunt, rigid
figure among the tottering pillars, or the sound of his hollow voice as
he muttered to himself among the ruins of the Pagan tombs.  Often, in
crowded cities, groups of men, congregated to talk over the fall of
Paganism, found him listening at their sides, and comforting them, when
they carelessly regretted their ancient faith, with a smiling and
whispered assurance that a time of restitution would yet come.  By all
opinions and in all places he was regarded as a harmless madman, whose
strange delusions and predilections were not to be combated, but to be
indulged.  Thus he wandered through the Christian world; regardless
alike of lapse of time and change of climate; living within himself;
mourning, as a luxury, over the fall of his worship; patient of wrongs,
insults, and disappointments; watching for the opportunity that he
still persisted in believing was yet to arrive; holding by his fatal
determination with all the recklessness of ambition and all the
perseverance of revenge.

The five years passed away unheeded, uncalculated, unregretted by
Ulpius.  For him, living but in the past, hoping but for the future,
space held no obstacles--time was an oblivion.  Years pass as days,
hours as moments, when the varying emotions which mark their existence
on the memory, and distinguish their succession on the dial of the
heart, exist no longer either for happiness or woe.  Dead to all
freshness of feeling, the mind of Ulpius, during the whole term of his
wanderings, lay numbed beneath the one idea that possessed it.  It was
only at the expiration of those unheeded years, when the chances of
travel turned his footsteps towards Alexandria, that his faculties
burst from the long bondage which had oppressed them.  Then--when he
passed through those gates which he had entered in former years a
proud, ambitious boy, when he walked ungreeted through the ruined
temple where he had once lived illustrious and revered--his dull, cold
thoughts arose strong and vital within him.  The spectacle of the scene
of his former glories, which might have awakened despair in others,
aroused the dormant passions, emancipated the stifled energies in him.
The projects of vengeance and the visions of restoration which he had
brooded over for five long years, now rose before him as realised
already under the vivid influence of the desecrated scenes around.  As
he stood beneath the shattered porticoes of the sacred place, not a
stone crumbling at his feet but rebuked him for his past inaction, and
strengthened him for daring, for conspiracy, for revenge, in the
service of the outraged gods. The ruined temples he had visited in his
gloomy pilgrimages now became revived by his fancy, as one by one they
rose on his toiling memory. Broken pillars soared from the ground;
desecrated idols reoccupied their vacant pedestals; and he, the exile
and the mourner, stood forth once again the ruler, the teacher, and the
priest.  The time of restitution was come; though his understanding
supplied him with no distinct projects, his heart urged him to rush
blindly on the execution of his reform.  The moment had
arrived--Macrinus should yet be avenged; the temple should at last be
restored.

He descended into the city; he hurried--neither welcomed nor
recognised--through the crowded streets; he entered the house of a man
who had once been his friend and colleague in the days that were past,
and poured forth to him his wild determinations and disjointed plans,
entreating his assistance, and promising him a glorious success.  But
his old companion had become, by a timely conversion to Christianity, a
man of property and reputation in Alexandria, and he turned from the
friendless enthusiast with indignation and contempt.  Repulsed, but not
disheartened, Ulpius sought others who he had known in his prosperity
and renown.  They had all renounced their ancient worship--they all
received him with studied coldness or careless disdain; but he still
persisted in his useless efforts.  He blinded his eyes to their
contemptuous looks; he shut his ears to their derisive words.
Persevering in his self-delusion, he appointed them messengers to their
brethren in other countries, captains of the conspiracy that was to
commence in Alexandria, orators before the people when the memorable
revolution had once begun.  It was in vain that they refused all
participation in his designs; he left them as the expressions of
refusal rose to their lips, and hurried elsewhere, as industrious in
his efforts, as devoted to his unwelcome mission, as if half the
population of the city had vowed themselves joyfully to aid him in his
frantic attempt.


Thus during the whole day he continued his labour of useless persuasion
among those in the city who had once been his friends.  When the
evening came, he repaired, weary but not despondent, to the earthly
paradise that he was determined to regain--to the temple where he had
once taught, and where he still imagined that he was again destined to
preside.  Here he proceeded, ignorant of the new laws, careless of
discovery and danger, to ascertain by divination, as in the days of
old, whether failure or success awaited him ultimately in his great
design.

Meanwhile the friends whose assistance Ulpius had determined to extort
were far from remaining inactive on their parts after the departure of
the aspiring priest.  They remembered with terror that the laws
affected as severely those concealing their knowledge of a Pagan
intrigue as those actually engaged in directing a Pagan conspiracy; and
their anxiety for their personal safety overcoming every consideration
of the dues of honour or the claims of ancient friendship, they
repaired in a body to the Prefect of the city, and informed him, with
all the eagerness of apprehension, of the presence of Ulpius in
Alexandria, and of the culpability of the schemes that he had proposed.

A search after the devoted Pagan was immediately commenced.  He was
found the same night before a ruined altar, brooding over the entrails
of an animal that he had just sacrificed.  Further proof of his guilt
could not be required.  He was taken prisoner; led forth the next
morning to be judged, amid the execrations of the very people who had
almost adored him once; and condemned the following day to suffer the
penalty of death.

At the appointed hour the populace assembled to behold the execution.
To their indignation and disappointment, however, when the officers of
the city appeared before the prison, it was only to inform the
spectators that the performance of the fatal ceremony had been
adjourned. After a mysterious delay of some weeks, they were again
convened, not to witness the execution, but to receive the
extraordinary announcement that the culprit's life had been spared, and
that his amended sentence now condemned him to labour as a slave for
life in the copper-mines of Spain.

What powerful influence induced the Prefect to risk the odium of
reprieving a prisoner whose guilt was so satisfactorily ascertained as
that of Ulpius never was disclosed.  Some declared that the city
magistrate was still at heart a Pagan, and that he consequently shrunk
from authorising the death of a man who had once been the most
illustrious among the professors of the ancient creed.  Others reported
that Ulpius had secured the leniency of his judges by acquainting them
with the position of one of those secret repositories of enormous
treasure supposed to exist beneath the foundations of the dismantled
Temple of Serapis.  But the truth of either of these rumours could
never be satisfactorily proved.  Nothing more was accurately discovered
than that Ulpius was removed from Alexandria to the place of earthly
torment set apart for him by the zealous authorities, at the dead of
night; and that the sentry at the gate through which he departed heard
him mutter to himself, as he was hurried onward, that his divinations
had prepared him for defeat, but that the great day of Pagan
restoration would yet arrive.

In the year 407, twelve years after the events above narrated, Ulpius
entered the city of Rome.

He had not advanced far, before the gaiety and confusion in the streets
appeared completely to bewilder him.  He hastened to the nearest public
garden that he could perceive, and avoiding the frequented paths, flung
himself down, apparently fainting with exhaustion, at the foot of a
tree.


For some time he lay on the shady resting-place which he had chosen,
gasping painfully for breath, his frame ever and anon shaken to its
centre by sudden spasms, and his lips quivering with an agitation which
he vainly endeavoured to suppress.  So changed was his aspect, that the
guards who had removed him from Alexandria, wretched as was his
appearance even then, would have found it impossible to recognise him
now as the same man whom they had formerly abandoned to slavery in the
mines of Spain.  The effluvia exhaled from the copper ore in which he
had been buried for twelve years had not only withered the flesh upon
his bones, but had imparted to its surface a livid hue, almost
death-like in its dulness.  His limbs, wasted by age and distorted by
suffering, bent and trembled beneath him; and his form, once so
majestic in its noble proportions, was now so crooked and misshapen,
that whoever beheld him could only have imagined that he must have been
deformed from his birth.  Of the former man no characteristic remained
but the expression of the stern, mournful eyes; and these, the truthful
interpreters of the indomitable mind whose emotions they seemed created
to express, preserved, unaltered by suffering and unimpaired by time,
the same look, partly of reflection, partly of defiance, and partly of
despair, which had marked them in those past days when the temple was
destroyed and the congregations of the Pagans dispersed.

But the repose at this moment demanded by his worn-out body was even
yet denied to it by his untamed, unwearied mind, and, as the voice of
his old delusion spoke within him again, the devoted priest rose from
his solitary resting-place, and looked forth upon the great city, whose
new worship he was vowed to overthrow.

'By years of patient watchfulness,' he whispered to himself, 'have I
succeeded in escaping successfully from my dungeon among the mines.
Yet a little more cunning, a little more endurance, a little more
vigilance, and I shall still live to people, by my own exertions, the
deserted temples of Rome.'

As he spoke he emerged from the grove into the street.  The joyous
sunlight--a stranger to him for years--shone warmly down upon his face,
as if to welcome him to liberty and the world.  The sounds of gay
laughter rang in his ears, as if to woo him back to the blest
enjoyments and amenities of life; but Nature's influence and man's
example were now silent alike to his lonely heart.  Over its dreary
wastes still reigned the ruthless ambition which had exiled love from
his youth, and friendship from his manhood, and which was destined to
end its mission of destruction by banishing tranquility from his age.
Scowling fiercely at all around and above him, he sought the loneliest
and shadiest streets.  Solitude had now become a necessity to his
heart.  The 'great gulph' of his unshared aspirations had long since
socially separated him for ever from his fellow-men.  He thought,
laboured, and suffered for himself alone.

To describe the years of unrewarded labour and unalleviated hardship
endured by Ulpius in the place of his punishment; to dwell on the day
that brought with it--whatever the season in the world above--the same
unwearying inheritance of exertion and fatigue; to chronicle the
history of night after night of broken slumber one hour, of wearying
thought the next, would be to produce a picture from the mournful
monotony of which the attention of the reader would recoil with
disgust.  It will be here sufficient to observe, that the influence of
the same infatuation which had nerved him to the defence of the
assaulted temple, and encouraged him to attempt his ill-planned
restoration of Paganism, had preserved him through sufferings under
which stronger and younger men would have sunk for ever; had prompted
his determination to escape from his slavery, and had now brought him
to Rome--old, forsaken, and feeble as he was--to risk new perils and
suffer new afflictions for the cause to which, body and soul, he had
ruthlessly devoted himself for ever.


Urged, therefore, by his miserable delusion, he had now entered a city
where even his name was unknown, faithful to his frantic project of
opposing himself, as a helpless, solitary man, against the people and
government of an Empire.  During his term of slavery, regardless of his
advanced years, he had arranged a series of projects, the gradual
execution of which would have demanded the advantages of a long and
vigorous life.  He no more desired, as in his former attempt at
Alexandria, to precipitate at all hazards the success of his designs.
He was now prepared to watch, wait, plot, and contrive for years on
years; he was resigned to be contented with the poorest and slowest
advancement--to be encouraged by the smallest prospect of ultimate
triumph.  Acting under this determination, he started his project by
devoting all that remained of his enfeebled energies to cautiously
informing himself, by every means in his power, of the private,
political, and religious sentiments of all men of influence in Rome.
Wherever there was a popular assemblage, he attended it to gather the
scandalous gossip of the day; wherever there was a chance of
overhearing a private conversation, he contrived to listen to it
unobserved. About the doors of taverns and the haunts of discharged
servants he lurked noiseless as a shadow, attentive alike to the
careless revelations of intoxication or the scurrility of malignant
slaves.  Day after day passed on, and still saw him devoted to his
occupation (which, servile as it was in itself, was to his eyes
ennobled by its lofty end), until at the expiration of some months he
found himself in possession of a vague and inaccurate fund of
information, which he stored up as a priceless treasure in his mind.
He next discovered the name and abode of every nobleman in Rome
suspected even of the most careless attachment to the ancient form of
worship.  He attended Christian churches, mastered the intricacies of
different sects, and estimated the importance of contending schisms;
gaining this collection of heterogeneous facts under the combined
disadvantages of poverty, solitude, and age; dependent for support on
the poorest public charities, and for shelter on the meanest public
asylums.  Every conclusion that he drew from all he learned partook of
the sanguine character of the fatal self-deception which had embittered
his whole life.  He believed that the dissensions which he saw raging
in the Church would speedily effect the destruction of Christianity
itself; that, when such a period should arrive, the public mind would
require but the guidance of some superior intellect to return to its
old religious predilections; and that to lay the foundation for
effecting in such a manner the desired revolution, it was necessary for
him--impossible though it might seem in his present degraded
condition--to gain access to the disaffected nobles of Rome, and
discover the secret of acquiring such an influence over them as would
enable him to infect them with his enthusiasm, and fire them with his
determination.  Greater difficulties even than these had been overcome
by other men.  Solitary individuals had, ere this, originated
revolutions.  The gods would favour him; his own cunning would protect
him.  Yet a little more patience, a little more determination, and he
might still, after all his misfortunes, be assured of success.

It was about this period that he first heard, while pursuing his
investigations, of an obscure man who had suddenly arisen to undertake
a reformation in the Christian Church, whose declared aim was to rescue
the new worship from that very degeneracy on the fatal progress of
which rested all his hopes of triumph.  It was reported that this man
had been for some time devoted to his reforming labours, but that the
difficulties attendant on the task that he had appointed for himself
had hitherto prevented him from attaining all the notoriety essential
to the satisfactory prosecution of his plans.  On hearing this rumour,
Ulpius immediately joined the few who attended the new orator's
discourses, and there heard enough to convince him that he listened to
the most determined zealot for Christianity in the city of Rome.  To
gain this man's confidence, to frustrate every effort that he might
make in his new vocation, to ruin his credit with his hearers, and to
threaten his personal safety by betraying his inmost secrets to his
powerful enemies in the Church, were determinations instantly adopted
by the Pagan as duties demanded by the exigencies of his creed.  From
that moment he seized every opportunity of favourably attracting the
new reformer's attention to himself, and, as the reader already knows,
he was at length rewarded for his cunning and perseverance by being
received into the household of the charitable and unsuspicious Numerian
as a pious convert to the Christianity of the early Church.


Once installed under Numerian's roof, the treacherous Pagan saw in the
Christian's daughter an instrument admirably adapted, in his
unscrupulous hands, for forwarding his wild project of obtaining the
ear of a Roman of power and station who was disaffected to the
established worship.  Among the patricians of whose anti-Christian
predilections report had informed him, was Numerian's neighbour,
Vetranio the senator. To such a man, renowned for his life of luxury, a
girl so beautiful as Antonina would be a bribe rich enough to enable
him to extort any promise required as a reward for betraying her while
under the protection of her father's house.  In addition to this
advantage to be drawn from her ruin, was the certainty that her loss
would so affect Numerian as to render him, for a time at least,
incapable of pursuing his labours in the cause of Christianity.  Fixed
then in his detestable purpose, the ruthless priest patiently awaited
the opportunity of commencing his machinations.  Nor did he watch in
vain.  The victim innocently fell into the very trap that he had
prepared for her when she first listened to the music of Vetranio's
lute, and permitted her treacherous guardian to become the friend who
concealed her disobedience from her father's ear.  After that first
fatal step every day brought the projects of Ulpius nearer to success.
The long-sought interview with the senator was at length obtained; the
engagement imperatively demanded on the one side was, as we have
already related, carelessly accepted on the other; the day that was to
bring success to the schemes of the betrayer, and degradation to the
honour of the betrayed, was appointed; and once more the cold heart of
the fanatic warmed to the touch of joy.  No doubts upon the validity of
his engagement with Vetranio ever entered his mind.  He never imagined
that powerful senator could with perfect impunity deny him the
impracticable assistance he had demanded as his reward, and thrust him
as an ignorant madman from his palace gates.  Firmly and sincerely he
believed that Vetranio was so satisfied with his readiness in pandering
to his profligate designs, and so dazzled by the prospect of the glory
which would attend success in the great enterprise, that he would
gladly hold to the performance of his promise whenever it should be
required of him.  In the meantime the work was begun.  Numerian was
already, through his agency, watched by the spies of a jealous and
unscrupulous Church.  Feuds, schisms, treacheries, and dissensions
marched bravely onward through the Christian ranks.  All things
combined to make it certain that the time was near at hand when,
through his exertions and the friendly senator's help, the restoration
of Paganism might be assured.

With the widest diversity of pursuit and difference of design, there
was still a strange and mysterious analogy between the temporary
positions of Ulpius and Numerian.  One was prepared to be a martyr for
the temple; the other to be a martyr for the Church.  Both were
enthusiasts in an unwelcome cause; both had suffered more than a life's
wonted share of affliction; and both were old, passing irretrievably
from their fading present on earth to the eternal future awaiting them
in the unknown spheres beyond.

But here--with their position--the comparison between them ends.  The
Christian's principle of action, drawn from the Divinity he served, was
love; the Pagan's, born of the superstition that was destroying him,
was hate.  The one laboured for mankind; the other for himself.  And
thus the aspirations of Numerian, founded on the general good,
nourished by offices of kindness, and nobly directed to a generous end,
might lead him into indiscretion, but could never degrade him into
crime--might trouble the serenity of his life, but could never deprive
him of the consolation of hope.  While, on the contrary, the ambition
of Ulpius, originating in revenge and directed to destruction, exacted
cruelty from his heart and duplicity from his mind; and, as the reward
for his service, mocked him alternately throughout his whole life with
delusion and despair.



CHAPTER 7.

THE BED-CHAMBER.

It is now time to resume our chronicle of the eventful night which
marked the destruction of Antonina's lute and the conspiracy against
Antonina's honour.


The gates of Vetranio's palace were closed, and the noises in it were
all hushed; the banquet was over, the triumph of the Nightingale Sauce
had been achieved, and the daybreak was already glimmering in the
eastern sky, when the senator's favoured servant, the freedman Carrio,
drew back the shutter of the porter's lodge, where he had been dozing
since the conclusion of the feast, and looked out lazily into the
street.  The dull, faint light of dawn was now strengthening slowly
over the lonely roadway and on the walls of the lofty houses.  Of the
groups of idlers of the lowest class who had assembled during the
evening in the street to snuff the fragrant odours which steamed afar
from Vetranio's kitchens, not one remained; men, women, and children
had long since departed to seek shelter wherever they could find it,
and to fatten their lean bodies on what had been charitable bestowed on
them of the coarser relics of the banquet.  The mysterious solitude and
tranquility of daybreak in a great city prevailed over all things.
Nothing impressed, however, by the peculiar and solemn attraction of
the scene at this moment, the freedman apostrophised the fresh morning
air, as it blew over him, in strong terms of disgust, and even ventured
in lowered tones to rail against his master's uncomfortable fancy for
being awakened after a feast at the approach of dawn.  Far too well
aware, nevertheless, of the necessity of yielding the most implicit
obedience to the commands he had received to resign himself any longer
to the pleasant temptations of repose, Carrio, after yawning, rubbing
his eyes, and indulging for a few moments more in the luxury of
complaint, set forth in earnest to follow the corridors leading to the
interior of the palace, and to awaken Vetranio without further delay.

He had not advanced more than a few steps when a proclamation, written
in letters of gold on a blue-coloured board, and hung against the wall
at his side, attracted his attention.  This public notice, which
delayed his progress at the very outset, and which was intended for the
special edification of all the inhabitants of Rome, was thus
expressed:--

'ON THIS DAY, AND FOR TEN DAYS FOLLOWING, THE AFFAIRS OF OUR PATRON
OBLIGE HIM TO BE ABSENT FROM ROME.'

Here the proclamation ended, without descending to particulars.  It had
been put forth, in accordance with the easy fashion of the age, to
answer at once all applications at Vetranio's palace during the
senator's absence.  Although the colouring of the board, the writing of
the letters, and the composition of the sentence were the work of his
own ingenuity, the worthy Carrio could not prevail upon himself to pass
the proclamation without contemplating its magnificence anew.  For some
time he stood regarding it with the same expression of lofty and
complacent approbation which we see in these modern days illuminating
the countenance of a connoisseur before one of his own old pictures
which he has bought as a great bargain, or dawning over the bland
features of a linen-draper as he surveys from the pavement his
morning's arrangement of the window of the shop.  All things, however,
have their limits, even a man's approval of an effort of his own skill.
Accordingly, after a prolonged review of the proclamation, some faint
ideas of the necessity of immediately obeying his master's commands
revived in the mind of the judicious Carrio, and counselled him to turn
his steps at once in the direction of the palace sleeping apartments.

Greatly wondering what new caprice had induced the senator to
contemplate leaving Rome at the dawn of day--for Vetranio had divulged
to no one the object of his departure--the freedman cautiously entered
his master's bed-chamber.  He drew aside the ample silken curtains
suspended around and over the sleeping couch, from the hands of Graces
and Cupids sculptured in marble; but the statues surrounded an empty
bed.  Vetranio was not there.  Carrio next entered the bathroom; the
perfumed water was steaming in its long marble basin, and the soft
wrapping-cloths lay ready for use; the attendant slave, with his
instruments of ablution, waited, half asleep, in his accustomed place;
but here also no signs of the master's presence appeared.  Somewhat
perplexed, the freedman examined several other apartments.  He found
guests, dancing girls, parasites, poets, painters--a motley
crew--occupying every kind of dormitory, and all peacefully engaged in
sleeping off the effects of the wine they had drunk at the banquet; but
the great object of his search still eluded him as before.  At last it
occurred to him that the senator, in an excess of convivial enthusiasm
and jovial hospitality, might yet be detaining some favoured guest at
the table of the feast.

Pausing, therefore, at some carved doors which stood ajar at one
extremity of a spacious hall, he pushed them open, and hurriedly
entered the banqueting-room beyond.


A soft, dim, luxurious light reigned over this apartment, which now
presented, as far as the eye could discern, an aspect of confusion that
was at once graceful and picturesque.  Of the various lamps, of every
variety of pattern, hanging from the ceiling, but few remained alight.
From those, however, which were still unextinguished there shone a mild
brightness, admirably adapted to display the objects immediately around
them.  The golden garlands and the alabaster pots of sweet ointment
which had been suspended before the guests during the banquet, still
hung from the painted ceiling.  On the massive table, composed partly
of ebony and partly of silver, yet lay, in the wildest confusion,
fragments of gastronomic delicacies, grotesque dinner services, vases
of flowers, musical instruments, and crystal dice; while towering over
all rose the glittering dish which had contained the nightingales
consumed by the feasters, with the four golden Cupids which had spouted
over them that illustrious invention--the Nightingale Sauce.  Around
the couches, of violet and rose colour, ranged along the table, the
perfumed and gaily-tinted powders that had been strewn in patterns over
the marble floor were perceptible for a few yards; but beyond this
point nothing more was plainly distinguishable.  The eye roved down the
sides of the glorious chamber, catching dim glimpses of gorgeous
draperies, crowded statues, and marble columns, but discerning nothing
accurately, until it reached the half-opened windows, and rested upon
the fresh dewy verdure now faintly visible in the shady gardens
without.  There--waving in the morning breezes, charged on every leaf
with their burden of pure and welcome moisture--rose the lofty
pine-trees, basking in the recurrence of the new day's beautiful and
undying youth, and rising in reproving contrast before the exhausted
allurements of luxury and the perverted creations of art which burdened
the tables of the hall within.

After a hasty survey of the apartment, the freedman appeared to be on
the point of quitting it in despair, when the noise of a falling dish,
followed by several partly suppressed and wholly confused exclamations
of affright, caught his ear.  He once more approached the
banqueting-table, retrimmed a lamp that hung near him, and taking it in
his hand, passed to the side of the room whence the disturbance
proceeded.  A hideous little negro, staring in ludicrous terror at a
silver oven, half filled with bread, which had just fallen beside him,
was the first object he discovered.  A few paces beyond the negro
reposed a beautiful boy, crowned with vine leaves and ivy, still
sleeping by the side of his lyre; and farther yet, stretched in an
uneasy slumber on a silken couch, lay the identical object of the
freedman's search--the illustrious author of the Nightingale Sauce.

Immediately above the sleeping senator hung his portrait, in which he
was modestly represented as rising by the assistance of Minerva to the
top of Parnassus, the nine Muses standing round him rejoicing.  At his
feet reposed a magnificent white cat, whose head rested in all the
luxurious laziness of satiety on the edge of a golden saucer half
filled with dormice stewed in milk.  The most indubitable evidences of
the night's debauch appeared in Vetranio's disordered dress and flushed
countenance as the freedman regarded him.  For some minutes the worthy
Carrio stood uncertain whether to awaken his master or not, deciding
finally, however, on obeying the commands he had received, and
disturbing the slumbers of the wearied voluptuary before him. To effect
this purpose, it was necessary to call in the aid of the singing-boy;
for, by a refinement of luxury, Vetranio had forbidden his attendants
to awaken him by any other method than the agency of musical sounds.

With some difficulty the boy was sufficiently aroused to comprehend the
service that was required of him.  For a short time the notes of the
lyre sounded in vain.  At last, when the melody took a louder and more
martial character, the sleeping patrician slowly opened his eyes and
stared vacantly around him.

'My respected patron,' said the polite Carrio in apologetic tones,
'commanded that I should awaken him with the dawn; the daybreak has
already appeared.'

When the freedman had ceased speaking, Vetranio sat up on the couch,
called for a basin of water, dipped his fingers in the refreshing
liquid, dried them abstractedly on the long silky curls of the
singing-boy who stood beside him, gazed about him once more, repeated
interrogatively the word 'daybreak', and sunk gently back upon his
couch.  We are grieved to confess it--but the author of the Nightingale
Sauce was moderately inebriated.


A short pause followed, during which the freedman and the singing-boy
stared upon each other in mutual perplexity.  At length the one resumed
his address of apology, and the other resumed his efforts on the lyre.
Once more, after an interval, the eyes of Vetranio lazily unclosed, and
this time he began to speak; but his thoughts--if thoughts they could
be called--were as yet wholly occupied by the 'table-talk' at the past
night's banquet.

'The ancient Egyptians--oh, sprightly and enchanting Camilla--were a
wise nation!' murmured the senator drowsily.  'I am myself descended
from the ancient Egyptians; and, therefore, I hold in high veneration
that cat in your lap, and all cats besides.  Herodotus--an historian
whose works I feel a certain gratification in publicly mentioning as
good--informs us, that when a cat died in the dwelling of an ancient
Egyptian, the owner shaved his eyebrows as a mark of grief, embalmed
the defunct animal in a consecrated house, and carried it to be
interred in a considerable city of Lower Egypt, called 'Bubastis'--an
Egyptian word which I have discovered to mean The Sepulchre of all the
Cats; whence it is scarcely erroneous to infer--'

At this point the speaker's power of recollection and articulation
suddenly failed him, and Carrio--who had listened with perfect gravity
to his master's oration upon cats--took immediate advantage of the
opportunity now afforded him to speak again.

'The equipage which my patron was pleased to command to carry him to
Aricia,' said he, with a strong emphasis on the last word, 'now stands
in readiness at the private gate of the palace gardens.'

As he heard the word 'Aricia', the senator's powers of recollection and
perception seemed suddenly to return to him.  Among that high order of
drinkers who can imbibe to the point of perfect enjoyment, and stop
short scientifically before the point of perfect oblivion, Vetranio
occupied an exalted rank.  The wine he had swallowed during the night
had disordered his memory and slightly troubled his self-possession,
but had not deprived him of his understanding. There was nothing
plebeian even in his debauchery; there was an art and a refinement in
his very excesses.

'Aricia--Aricia!' he repeated to himself, 'ah! the villa that Julia
lent to me at Ravenna!  The pleasures of the table must have obscured
for a moment the image of my beautiful pupil of other days, which now
revives before me again as Love resumes the dominion that Bacchus
usurped! My excellent Carrio,' he continued, speaking to the freedman,
'you have done perfectly right in awakening me; delay not a moment more
in ordering my bath to be prepared, or my man-monster Ulpius, the king
of conspirators and high priest of all that is mysterious, will wait
for me in vain!  And you, Glyco,' he pursued, when Carrio had departed,
addressing the singing-boy, 'array yourself for a journey, and wait
with my equipage at the garden-gate.  I shall require you to accompany
me in my expedition to Aricia.  But first, oh! gifted and valued
songster, let me reward you for the harmonious symphony that has just
awakened me.  Of what rank of my musicians are you at present, Glyco?'

'Of the fifth,' replied the boy.

'Were you bought, or born in my house?' asked Vetranio.

'Neither; but bequeathed to you by Geta's testament,' rejoined the
gratified Glyco.

'I advance you,' continued Vetranio, 'to the privileges and the pay of
the first rank of my musicians; and I give you, as a proof of my
continued favour, this ring.  In return for these obligations, I desire
to keep secret whatever concerns my approaching expedition; to employ
your softest music in soothing the ear of a young girl who will
accompany us--in calming her terrors if she is afraid, in drying her
tears if she weeps; and finally, to exercise your voice and your lute
incessantly in uniting the name 'Antonina' to the sweetest harmonies of
sound that your imagination can suggest.'

Pronouncing these words with an easy and benevolent smile, and looking
round complacently on the display of luxurious confusion about him,
Vetranio retired to the bath that was to prepare him for his
approaching triumph.


Meanwhile a scene of a very different nature was proceeding without, at
Numerian's garden-gate. Here were no singing-boys, no freedmen, no
profusion of rich treasures--here appeared only the solitary and
deformed figure of Ulpius, half hidden among surrounding trees, while
he waited at his appointed post.  As time wore on, and still Vetranio
did not appear, the Pagan's self-possession began to desert him.  He
moved restlessly backwards and forwards over the soft dewy grass,
sometimes in low tones calling upon his gods to hasten the tardy
footsteps of the libertine patrician, who was to be made the instrument
of restoring to the temples the worship of other days--sometimes
cursing the reckless delay of the senator, or exulting in the treachery
by which he madly believed his ambition was at last to be fulfilled;
but still, whatever his words or thoughts, wrought up to the same pitch
of fierce, fanatic enthusiasm which had strengthened him for the
defence of his idols at Alexandria, and had nerved him against the
torment and misery of years in his slavery in the copper mines of Spain.

The precious moments were speeding irrevocably onwards.  His impatience
was rapidly changing to rage and despair as he strained his eyes for
the last time in the direction of the palace gardens, and now at length
discerned a white robe among the distant trees.  Vetranio was rapidly
approaching him.

Restored by his bath, no effect of the night's festivity but its
exhilaration remained in the senator's brain.  But for a slight
uncertainty in his gait, and an unusual vacancy in his smile, the
elegant gastronome might now have appeared to the closest observer
guiltless of the influence of intoxicating drinks.  He advanced,
radiant with exultation, prepared for conquest, to the place where
Ulpius awaited him, and was about to address the Pagan with that
satirical familiarity so fashionable among the nobles of Rome in their
communications with the people, when the object of his intended
pleasantries sternly interrupted him, saying, in tones more of command
than of advice, 'Be silent!  If you would succeed in your purpose,
follow me without uttering a word!'

There was something so fierce and determined in the tones of the old
man's voice--low, tremulous, and husky though they were--as he uttered
those words, that the bold, confident senator instinctively held his
peace as he followed his stern guide into Numerian's house. Avoiding
the regular entrance, which at that early hour of the morning was
necessarily closed, Ulpius conducted the patrician through a small
wicket into the subterranean apartment, or rather outhouse, which was
his customary, though comfortless, retreat in his leisure hours, and
which was hardly ever entered by the other members of the Christian's
household.

From the low, arched brick ceiling of this place hung an earthenware
lamp, whose light, small and tremulous, left all the corners of the
apartment in perfect obscurity.  The thick buttresses that projected
inwards from the walls, made visible by their prominence, displayed on
their surfaces rude representations of idols and temples drawn in
chalk, and covered with strange, mysterious hieroglyphics.  On a block
of stone which served as a table lay some fragments of small statues,
which Vetranio recognised as having belonged to the old, accredited
representations of Pagan idols.  Over the sides of the table itself
were scrawled in Latin characters these two words, 'Serapis',
'Macrinus'; and about its base lay some pieces of torn, soiled linen,
which still retained enough of their former character, both in shape,
size, and colour, to convince Vetranio that they had once served as the
vestments of a Pagan priest.  Further than this the senator's
observation did not carry him, for the close, almost mephitic
atmosphere of the place already began to affect him unfavourably.  He
felt a suffocating sensation in his throat and a dizziness in his head.
The restorative influence of his recent bath declined rapidly.  The
fumes of the wine he had drunk in the night, far from having been, as
he imagined, permanently dispersed, again mounted to his head.  He was
obliged to lean against the stone table to preserved his equilibrium as
he faintly desired the Pagan to shorten their sojourn in his miserable
retreat.


Without even noticing the request, Ulpius hurriedly proceeded to erase
the drawings on the buttresses and the inscriptions on the table.  Then
collecting the fragments of statues and the pieces of linen, he
deposited them in a hiding-place in the corner of the apartment.  This
done, he returned to the stone against which Vetranio supported
himself, and for a few minutes silently regarded the senator with a
firm, earnest, and penetrating gaze.

A dark suspicion that he had betrayed himself into the hands of a
villain, who was then plotting some atrocious project connected with
his safety or honour, began to rise on the senator's bewildered brain
as he unwillingly submitted to the penetrating examination of the
Pagan's glance. At that moment, however, the withered lips of the old
man slowly parted, and he began to speak. Whether as he looked on
Vetranio's disturbed countenance, and marked his unsteady gait, the
heart of Ulpius, for the first time since his introduction to the
senator, misgave him when he thought of their monstrous engagement; or
whether the near approach of the moment that was henceforth, as he
wildly imagined, to fix Vetranio as his assistant and ally, so
powerfully affected his mind that it instinctively sought to vent its
agitation through the natural medium of words, it is useless to
inquire.  Whatever his motives for speech, the impressive earnestness
of his manner gave evidence of the depth and intensity of his emotions
as he addressed the senator thus:--

'I have submitted to servitude in a Christian's house, I have suffered
the contamination of a Christian's prayers, to gain the use of your
power and station when the time to employ them should arrive.  The hour
has now come when my part of the conditions of our engagement is to be
performed; the hour will yet come when your part shall be exacted from
you in turn!  Do you wonder at what I have done and what I will do?  Do
you marvel that a household drudge should speak thus to a nobleman of
Rome?  Are you astonished that I risk so much as to venture on
enlisting you--by the sacrifice of the girl who now slumbers above--in
the cause whose end is the restoration of our fathers' gods, and in
whose service I have suffered and grown old?  Listen, and you shall
hear from what I have fallen--you shall know what I once was!'

'I adjure you by all the gods and goddesses of our ancient worship, let
me hear you where I can breathe--in the garden, on the housetop,
anywhere but in this dungeon!' murmured the senator in entreating
accents.

'My birth, my parents, my education, my ancient abode--these I will not
disclose,' interrupted the Pagan, raising one arm authoritatively, as
if to obstruct Vetranio from approaching the door.  'I have sworn by my
gods, that until the day of restitution these secrets of my past life
shall remain unrevealed to strangers' ears.  Unknown I entered Rome,
and unknown I will labour in Rome until the projects I have lived for
are crowned with success!  It is enough that I confess to you that with
those sacred images whose fragments you have just beheld, I was once
lodged; that those sacred vestments whose remains you discerned at your
feet, I once wore.  To attain the glories of the priesthood there was
nothing that I did not resign, to preserve them there was nothing I did
not perform, to recover them there is nothing that I will not attempt!
I was once illustrious, prosperous, beloved; of my glory, my happiness,
my popularity, the Christians have robbed me, and I will yet live to
requite it heavily at their hands!  I had a guardian who loved me in my
youth; the Christians murdered him!  A temple was under the rule of my
manhood; the Christians destroyed it!  The people of a whole nation
once listened to my voice; the Christians have dispersed them!  The
wise, the great, the beautiful, the good, were once devoted to me; the
Christians have made me a stranger at their doors, and outcast of their
affections and thoughts! For all this shall I take no vengeance?  Shall
I not plot to rebuild my ruined temple, and win back, in my age, the
honours that adorned me in my youth?'

'Assuredly!--at once--without delay!' stammered Vetranio, returning the
stern and inquiring gaze of the Pagan with a bewildered, uneasy stare.


'To mount over the bodies of the Christian slain,' continued the old
man, his sinister eyes dilating in anticipated triumph as he whispered
close at the senator's ear, 'to rebuild the altars that the Christians
have overthrown, is the ambition that has made light to me the
sufferings of my whole life.  I have battled, and it has sustained me
in the midst of carnage; I have wandered, and it has been my home in
the desert; I have failed, and it has supported me; I have been
threatened with death, and it has preserved me from fear; I have been
cast into slavery, and it has made my fetters light.  You see me now,
old, degraded, lonely--believe that I long neither for wife, children,
tranquility, nor possessions; that I desire no companion but my
cherished and exalted purpose! Remember, then, in the hour of
performance the promise you have now made to aid me in the achievement
of that purpose!  Remember that you are a Pagan yourself!  Feast,
laugh, carouse with your compeers; be still the airy jester, the gay
companion; but never forget the end to which you are vowed--the destiny
of glory that the restoration of our deities has in store for us both!'

He ceased.  Though his voice, while he spoke, never rose beyond a
hoarse, monotonous, half-whispering tone, all the ferocity of his
abused and degraded nature was for the instant thoroughly aroused by
his recapitulation of his wrongs.  Had Vetranio at this moment shown
any symptoms of indecision, or spoken any words of discouragement, he
would have murdered him on the spot where they stood.  Every feature in
the Pagan's seared and livid countenance expressed the stormy emotions
that were rushing over his heart as he now confronted his bewildered
yet attentive listener.  His firm, menacing position; his poor and
scanty garments; his wild, shaggy hair; his crooked, distorted form;
his stern, solemn, unwavering gaze--opposed as they were (under the
fitful illumination of the expiring lamp and the advancing daylight) to
the unsteady gait, the vacant countenance, the rich robes, the youthful
grace of form and delicacy of feature of the object of his steady
contemplation, made so wild and strange a contrast between his
patrician ally and himself that they scarcely looked like beings of the
same race. Nothing could be more immense than the difference, more wild
than the incongruity between them.  It was sickness hand-in-hand with
health; pain marshalled face to face with enjoyment; darkness ranged in
monstrous discordance by the very side of light.

The next instant--just as the astonished senator was endeavouring to
frame a suitable answer to the solemn adjuration that had been
addressed to him--Ulpius seized his arm, and opening a door at the
inner extremity of the apartment, led him up some stairs that conducted
to the interior of the house.

They passed the hall, on the floor of which still lay the fragments of
the broken lute, dimly distinguishable in the soft light of daybreak;
and ascending another staircase, paused at a little door at the top,
which Ulpius cautiously opened, and in a moment afterwards Vetranio was
admitted into Antonina's bed-chamber.


The room was of no great extent; its scanty furniture was of the most
ordinary description; no ornaments glittered on its walls; no frescoes
adorned its ceiling; and yet there was a simple elegance in its
appearance, an unobtrusive propriety in its minutest details, which
made it at once interesting and attractive to the eye.  From the white
curtains at the window to the vase of flowers standing by the bedside,
the same natural refinement of taste appeared in the arrangement of all
that the apartment contained.  No sound broke the deep silence of the
place, save the low, soft breathing, occasionally interrupted by a
long, trembling sigh, of its sleeping occupant.  The sole light in the
room consisted of a little lamp, so placed in the middle of the flowers
round the sides of the vase that no extended or steady illumination was
cast upon any object.  There was something in the decent propriety of
all that was visible in the bed-chamber; in the soft obscurity of its
atmosphere; in the gentle and musical sound that alone interrupted its
magical stillness, impressive enough, it might have been imagined, to
have awakened some hesitation in the bosom of the boldest libertine ere
he deliberately proceeded to intrude on the unprotected slumbers of its
occupant.  No such feeling of indecision, however, troubled the
thoughts of Vetranio as he cast a rapid glance round the apartment
which he had ventured so treacherously to invade.  The fumes of the
wine he had imbibed at the banquet had been so thoroughly resuscitated
by the oppressive atmosphere of the subterranean retreat he had just
quitted, as to have left him nothing of his more refined nature.  All
that was honourable or intellectual in his character had now completely
ceded to all that was base and animal.  He looked round, and perceiving
that Ulpius had silently quitted him, softly closed the door.  Then
advancing to the bedside with the utmost caution compatible with the
involuntary unsteadiness of an intoxicated man, he took the lamp from
the vase in which it was half concealed, and earnestly surveyed by its
light the figure of the sleeping girl.

The head of Antonina was thrown back and rested rather over than on her
pillow.  Her light linen dress had become so disordered during the
night that it displayed her throat and part of her bosom, in all the
dawning beauties of their youthful formation, to the gaze of the
licentious Roman.  One hand half supported her head, and was almost
entirely hidden in the locks of her long black hair, which had escaped
from the white cincture intended to confine it, and now streamed over
the pillow in dazzling contrast to the light bed-furniture around it.
The other hand held tightly clasped to her bosom the precious fragment
of her broken lute.  The deep repose expressed in her position had not
thoroughly communicated itself to her face.  Now and then her slightly
parted lips moved and trembled, and ever and anon a change, so faint
and fugitive that it was hardly perceptible, appeared in her
complexion, breathing on the soft olive that was its natural hue, the
light rosy flush which the emotions of the past night had impressed on
it ere she slept.  Her position, in its voluptuous negligence, seemed
the very type of Oriental loveliness; while her face, calm and
sorrowful in its expression, displayed the more refined and sober
graces of the European model.  And thus these two characteristics of
two different orders of beauty, appearing conjointly under one form,
produced a whole so various and yet so harmonious, so impressive and
yet so attractive, that the senator, as he bent over the couch, though
the warm, soft breath of the young girl played on his cheeks and waved
the tips of his perfumed locks, could hardly imagine that the scene
before him was more than a bright, delusive dream.

While Vetranio was yet absorbed in admiration of her charms, Antonina's
form slightly moved, as if agitated by the influence of a passing
dream. The change thus accomplished in her position broke the spell
that its former stillness and beauty had unconsciously wrought to
restrain the unhallowed ardour of the profligate Roman.  He now passed
his arm round her warm, slender figure, and gently raising her till her
head rested on his shoulder as he sat by the bed, imprinted kiss after
kiss on the pure lips that sleep had innocently abandoned to him.

As he had foreseen, Antonina instantly awoke, but, to his unmeasured
astonishment, neither started nor shrieked.  The moment she had opened
her eyes she had recognised the person of Vetranio; and that
overwhelming terror which suspends in its victims the use of every
faculty, whether of the body or the mind, had immediately possessed
itself of her heart.  Too innocent to imagine the real motive that
prompted the senator's intrusion on her slumbers, where others of her
sex would have foreboded dishonour, she feared death.  All her father's
vague denunciations against the enormities of the nobles of Rome rushed
in an instant over her mind, and her childish imagination pictured
Vetranio as armed with some terrible and mysterious vengeance to be
wreaked on her for having avoided all communication with him as soon as
she had gained possession of her lute.  Prostrate beneath the
petrifying influence of her fears, motionless and powerless before him
as its prey before the serpent, she made no effort to move or speak;
but looked up steadfastly into the senator's face, her large eyes fixed
and dilated in a gaze of overpowering terror.

Intoxicated though he was, the affrighted expression of the poor girl's
pale, rigid countenance did not escape Vetranio's notice; and he taxed
his bewildered brain for such soothing and reassuring expressions as
would enable him to introduce his profligate proposals with some chance
that they would be listened to and understood.


'Dearest pupil!  Most beautiful of Roman maidens,' he began in the
husky, monotonous tones of inebriety, 'abandon your fears!  I come
hither, wafted by the breath of love, to restore the worship of the--I
would say to bear you on my bosom to a villa--the name of which has for
the moment escaped my remembrance.  You cannot have forgotten that it
was I who taught you to compose the Nightingale Sauce--or, no--let me
rather say to play upon the lute.  Love, music, pleasure, all await you
in the arms of your attached Vetranio.  Your eloquent silence speaks
encouragement to my heart.  Beloved Anto--'

Here the senator suddenly paused; for the eyes of the girl, which had
hitherto been fixed on him with the same expression of blank dismay
that had characterised them from the first, slowly moved in the
direction of the door.  The instant afterwards a slight noise caught
Vetranio's ear, and Antonina shuddered so violently as he pressed her
to his side that he felt it through his whole frame.  Slowly and
unwillingly he withdrew his gaze from the pale yet lovely countenance
on which it had been fixed, and looked up.

At the open door, pale, silent, motionless, stood the master of the
house.

Incapable, from the confusion of his ideas, of any other feeling than
the animal instinct of self-defence, Vetranio no sooner beheld
Numerian's figure than he rose, and drawing a small dagger from his
bosom, attempted to advance on the intruder.  He found himself,
however, restrained by Antonina, who had fallen on her knees before
him, and grasped his robe with a strength which seemed utterly
incompatible with the slenderness of her form and the feebleness of her
sex and age.

The first voice that broke the silence which ensued was Numerian's.  He
advanced, his face ghastly with anguish, his lip quivering with
suppressed emotions, to the senator's side, and addressed him thus:--

'Put up your weapon; I come but to ask a favour at your hands.'

Vetranio mechanically obeyed him.  There was something in the stern
calmness, frightful at such a moment, of the Christian's manner that
awed him in spite of himself.

'The favour I would petition for,' continued Numerian, in low, steady,
bitter tones, 'is that you would remove your harlot there, to your own
abode.  Here are no singing-boys, no banqueting-halls, no perfumed
couches.  The retreat of a solitary old man is no place for such an one
as she.  I beseech you, remove her to a more congenial home.  She is
well fitted for her trade; her mother was a harlot before her!'

He laughed scornfully, and pointed, as he spoke, to the figure of the
unhappy girl kneeling with outstretched arms at his feet.

'Father, father!' she cried, in accents bereft of their native softness
and melody, 'have you forgotten me?'

'I know you not!' he replied, thrusting her from him.  'Return to his
bosom; you shall never more be pressed to mine.  Go to his palace; my
house is yours no longer!  You are his harlot, not my daughter!  I
command you--go!'

As he advanced towards her with fierce glance and threatening
demeanour, she suddenly rose up. Her reason seemed crushed within her
as she looked with frantic earnestness from Vetranio to her father, and
then back again from her father to Vetranio.  On one side she saw an
enemy who had ruined her she knew not how, and who threatened her with
she knew not what; on the other, a parent who had cast her off.  For
one instant she directed a final look on the room, that, sad and lonely
though it was, had still been a home to her; and then, without a word
or a sigh, she turned, and crouching like a beaten dog, fled from the
house.


During the whole of the scene Vetranio had stood so fixed in the
helpless astonishment of intoxication as to be incapable of moving or
uttering a word.  All that took place during the short and terrible
interview between father and child utterly perplexed him.  He heard no
loud, violent anger on one side, no clamorous petitioning for
forgiveness on the other.  The stern old man whom Antonina had called
father, and who had been pointed out to him as the most austere
Christian in Rome, far from avenging his intrusion on Antonina's
slumber, had voluntarily abandoned his daughter to his licentious will.
That the anger or irony of so severe a man should inspire such an
action as this, or that Numerian, like his servant, was plotting to
obtain some strange mysterious favour from him by using Antonina as a
bribe, seemed perfectly impossible. All that passed before the senator
was, to his bewildered imagination, thoroughly incomprehensible.
Frivolous, thoughtless, profligate as he might be, his nature was not
radically base, and when the scene of which he had been the astounded
witness was abruptly terminated by the flight of Antonina, the look of
frantic misery fixed on him by the unfortunate girl at the moment of
her departure, almost sobered him for the instant, as he stood before
the now solitary father gazing vacantly around him with emotions of
uncontrollable confusion and dismay.

Meanwhile a third person was now approaching to join the two occupants
of the bedchamber abandoned by its ill-fated mistress.  Although in the
subterranean retreat to which he had retired on leaving Vetranio,
Ulpius had not noticed the silent entrance of the master of the house,
he had heard through the open doors the sound, low though it was, of
the Christian's voice.  As he rose, suspecting all things and prepared
for every emergency, to ascend to the bedchamber, he saw, while he
mounted the lowest range of stairs, a figure in white pass rapidly
through the hall and disappear by the principal entrance of the house.
He hesitated for an instant and looked after it, but the fugitive
figure had passed so swiftly in the uncertain light of early morning
that he was unable to identify it, and he determined to ascertain the
progress of events, now that Numerian must have discovered a portion at
least of the plot against his daughter and himself, by ascending
immediately to Antonina's apartment, whatever might be the consequences
of his intrusion at such an hour on her father's wrath.

As soon as the Pagan appeared before him, a sensible change took place
in Vetranio.  The presence of Ulpius in the chamber was a positive
relief to the senator's perturbed faculties, after the mysterious,
overpowering influence that the moral command expressed in the mere
presence of the father and the master of the house, at such an hour,
had exercised over them. Over Ulpius he had an absolute right, Ulpius
was his dependant; and he determined, therefore, to extort from the
servant whom he despised an explanation of the mysteries in the conduct
of the master whom he feared, and the daughter whom he began to doubt.

'Where is Antonina?' he cried, starting as if from a trance, and
advancing fiercely towards the treacherous Pagan.  'She has left the
room--she must have taken refuge with you.'

With a slow and penetrating gaze Ulpius looked round the apartment.  A
faint agitation was perceptible in his livid countenance, but he
uttered not a word.

The senator's face became pale and red with alternate emotions of
apprehension and rage.  He seized the Pagan by the throat, his eyes
sparkled, his blood boiled, he began to suspect even then that Antonina
was lost to him for ever.

'I ask you again where is she?' he shouted in a voice of fury.  'If
through this night's work she is lost or harmed, I will revenge it on
you.  Is this the performance of your promise?  Do you think that I
will direct your desired restoration of the gods of old for this?  If
evil comes to Antonina through your treachery, sooner than assist in
your secret projects, I would see you and your accursed deities all
burning together in the Christians' hell!  Where is the girl, you
slave? Villain, where was your vigilance, when you let that man
surprise us at our first interview?'

He turned towards Numerian as he spoke.  Trouble and emergency gift the
faculties with a more than mortal penetration.  Every word that he had
uttered had eaten its burning way into the father's heart.  Hours of
narrative could not have convinced him how fatally he had been
deceived, more thoroughly than the few hasty expressions he had just
heard.  No word passed his lips--no action betrayed his misery.  He
stood before the spoilers of his home, changed in an instant from the
courageous enthusiast to the feeble, helpless, heart-broken man.

Though all the ferocity of his old Roman blood had been roused in
Vetranio, as he threatened Ulpius, the father's look of cold, silent,
frightful despair froze it in his young veins in an instant. His heart
was still the impressible heart of youth; and, struck for the first
time in his life with emotions of horror and remorse, he advanced a
step to offer such explanation and atonement as he best might, when the
voice of Ulpius suspended his intentions, and made him pause to listen.

'She passed me in the hall,' muttered the Pagan, doggedly.  'I did my
part in betraying her into your power--it was for you to hinder her in
her flight.  Why did you not strike him to the earth,' he continued,
pointing with a mocking smile to Numerian, 'when he surprised you?  You
are wealthy and a noble of Rome; murder would have been no crime in
you!'

'Stand back!' cried the senator, thrusting him from the position he had
hitherto occupied in the door-way.  'She may be recovered even yet!
All Rome shall be searched for her!'

The next instant he disappeared from the room, and the master and
servant were left together alone.

The silence that now reigned in the apartment was broken by distant
sounds of uproar and confusion in the streets of the city beneath.
These ominous noises had arisen with the dawn of day, but the different
emotions of the occupants of Numerian's abode had so engrossed them,
that the turmoil in the outer world had passed unheeded by all.  No
sooner, however, had Vetranio departed than it caught the attention of
Ulpius, and he advanced to the window.  What he there saw and heard was
of no ordinary importance, for it at once fixed him to the spot where
he stood in mute and ungovernable surprise.

While Ulpius was occupied at the window, Numerian had staggered to the
side of the bed which his ill-timed severity had made vacant, perhaps
for ever.  The power of action, the capacity to go forth and seek his
child himself, was entirely suspended in the agony of her loss, as the
miserable man fell on his knees, and in the anguish of his heart
endeavoured to find solace in prayer.  In the positions they severally
occupied the servant and the master long remained--the betrayer
watching at the window, the betrayed mourning at his lost daughter's
bed--both alike silent, both alike unconscious of the lapse of time.

At length, apparently unaware at first that he was not alone in the
room, Numerian spoke.  In his low, broken, tremulous accents, none of
his adherents would have recognised the voice of the eloquent
preacher--the bold chastiser of the vices of the Church.  The whole
nature of the man--moral, intellectual, physical--seemed fatally and
completely changed.

'She was innocent, she was innocent!' he whispered to himself.  'And
even had she been guilty, was it for me to drive her from my doors!  My
part, like my Redeemer's, was to teach repentance, and to show mercy!
Accursed be the pride and anger that drove justice and patience from my
heart, when I beheld her, as I thought, submitting herself without a
struggle or a cry, to my dishonour, and hers!  Could I not have
imagined her terror, could I not have remembered her purity?  Alas, my
beloved, if I myself have been the dupe of the wicked, what marvel is
it that you should have been betrayed as well!  And I have driven you
from me, you, from whose mouth no word of anger ever dropped!  I have
thrust you from my bosom, you, who were the adornment of my age!  My
death approaches, and you will not be by to pardon my heavy offence, to
close my weary eyes, to mourn by my solitary tomb!  God--oh God!  If I
am left thus lonely on the earth, thou hast punished me beyond what I
can bear!'

He paused--his emotions for the instant bereft him of speech.  After an
interval, he muttered to himself in a low, moaning voice--'I called her
harlot!  My pure, innocent child!  I called her harlot--I called her
harlot!'


In a paroxysm of despair, he started up and looked distractedly around
him.  Ulpius still stood motionless at the window.  At the sight of the
ruthless Pagan he trembled in every limb.  All those infirmities of age
that had been hitherto spared him, seemed to overwhelm him in an
instant.  He feebly advanced to his betrayer's side, and addressed him
thus:--

'I have lodged you, taught you, cared for you; I have never intruded on
your secrets, never doubted your word, and for all this, you have
repaid me by plotting against my daughter and deceiving me!  If your
end was to harm me by assailing my child's happiness and honour you
have succeeded! If you would banish me from Rome, if you would plunge
me into obscurity, to serve some mysterious ambition of your own, you
may dispose of me as you will!  I bow before the terrible power of your
treachery!  I will renounce whatever you command, if you will restore
me to my child!  I am helpless and miserable; I have neither heart nor
strength to seek her myself!  You, who know all things and can dare all
dangers, may restore her to pardon and bless me, if you will!
Remember, whoever you really are, that you were once helpless and
alone, and that you are still old, like me!  Remember that I have
promised to abandon to you whatever you desire!  Remember that no
woman's voice can cheer me, no woman's heart feel for me, now that I am
old and lonely, but my daughter's!  I have guessed from the words of
the nobleman whom you serve, what are the designs you cherish and the
faith you profess; I will neither betray the one nor assault the other!
I thought that my labours for the Church were more to me than anything
on earth, but now, that through my fault, my daughter is driven from
her father's roof, I know that she is dearer to me than the greatest of
my designs; I must gain her pardon; I must win back her affection
before I die!  You are powerful and can recover her!  Ulpius!  Ulpius!'

As he spoke, the Christian knelt at the Pagan's feet.  It was terrible
to see the man of affection and integrity thus humbled before the man
of heartlessness and crime.

Ulpius turned to behold him, then without a word he raised him from the
ground, and thrusting him to the window, pointed with flashing eyes to
the wide view without.

The sun had arisen high in the heaven and beamed in dazzling brilliancy
over Rome and the suburbs.  A vague, fearful, mysterious desolation
seemed to have suddenly overwhelmed the whole range of dwellings beyond
the walls.  No sounds rose from the gardens, no population idled in the
streets.  The ramparts on the other hand were crowded at every visible
point with people of all ranks, and the distant squares and
amphitheatres of the city itself, swarmed like ant-hills to the eye
with the crowds that struggled within them.  Confused cries and strange
wild noises rose at all points from these masses of human beings.  The
whole of Rome seemed the prey of a vast and universal revolt.

Extraordinary and affrighting as was the scene at the moment when he
beheld it, it passed unheeded before the eyes of the scarce conscious
father.  He was blind to all sights but his daughter's form, deaf to
all sounds but her voice; and he murmured as he looked vacantly forth
upon the wild view before him, 'Where is my child!--where is my child!'

'What is your child to me?  What are the fortunes of affections of man
or woman, at such an hour as this?' cried the Pagan, as he stood by
Numerian, with features horribly animated by the emotions of fierce
delight and triumph that were raging within him at the prospect he
beheld.  'Dotard, look from this window!  Listen to those voices!  The
gods whom I serve, the god whom you and your worship would fain have
destroyed, have risen to avenge themselves at last! Behold those
suburbs, they are left desolate!  Hear those cries--they are from Roman
lips!  While your household's puny troubles have run their course, this
city of apostates has been doomed!  In the world's annals this morning
will never be forgotten!  THE GOTHS ARE AT THE GATES OF ROME!'



CHAPTER 8.

THE GOTHS.

It was no false rumour that had driven the populace of the suburbs to
fly to the security of the city walls.  It was no ill-founded cry of
terror that struck the ear of Ulpius, as he stood at Numerian's window.
The name of Rome had really lost its pristine terrors; the walls of
Rome, those walls which had morally guarded the Empire by their renown,
as they had actually guarded its capital by their strength, were
deprived at length of their ancient inviolability.  An army of
barbarians had indeed penetrated for conquest and for vengeance to the
City of the World!  The achievement which the invasions of six hundred
years had hitherto attempted in vain, was now accomplished, and
accomplished by the men whose forefathers had once fled like hunted
beasts to their native fastnesses, before the legions of the
Caesars--'The Goths were at the gates of Rome!'

And now, as his warriors encamped around him, as he saw the arrayed
hosts whom his summons had gathered together, and his energy led on,
threatening at their doors the corrupt senate who had deceived, and the
boastful populace who had despised him, what emotions stirred within
the heart of Alaric!  As the words of martial command fell from his
lips, and his eyes watched the movements of the multitudes around him,
what exalted aspirations, what daring resolves, grew and strengthened
in the mind of the man who was the pioneer of that mighty revolution,
which swept from one quarter of the world the sway, the civilisation,
the very life and spirit of centuries of ancient rule!  High thoughts
gathered fast in his mind; a daring ambition expanded within him--the
ambition, not of the barbarian plunderer, but of the avenger who had
come to punish; not of the warrior who combated for combat's sake, but
of the hero who was vowed to conquer and to sway.  From the far-distant
days when Odin was driven from his territories by the romans, to the
night polluted by the massacre of the hostages in Aquileia, the hour of
just and terrible retribution for Gothic wrongs had been delayed
through the weary lapse of years, and the warning convulsion of bitter
strifes, to approach at last under him.  He looked on the towering
walls before him, the only invader since Hannibal by whom they had been
beheld; and he felt as he looked, that his new aspirations did not
deceive him, that his dreams of dominion were brightening into proud
reality, that his destiny was gloriously linked with the overthrow of
Imperial Rome!

But even in the moment of approaching triumph, the leader of the Goths
was still wily in purpose and moderate in action.  His impatient
warriors waited but the word to commence the assault, to pillage the
city, and to slaughter the inhabitants; but he withheld it.  Scarcely
had the army halted before the gates of Rome, when the news was
promulgated among their ranks, that Alaric, for purposes of his own,
had determined to reduce the city by a blockade.

The numbers of his forces, increased during his march by the accession
of thirty thousand auxiliaries, were now divided into battalions,
varying in strength according to the service that was required of them.
These divisions stretched round the city walls, and though occupying
separate posts, and devoted to separate duties, were so arranged as to
be capable of uniting at a signal in any numbers, on any given point.
Each body of men was commanded by a tried and veteran warrior, in whose
fidelity Alaric could place the most implicit trust, and to whom he
committed the duty of enforcing the strictest military discipline that
had ever prevailed among the Gothic ranks.  Before each of the twelve
principal gates a separate encampment was raised. Multitudes watched
the navigation of the Tiber in every possible direction, with untiring
vigilance; and not one of the ordinary inlets to Rome, however
apparently unimportant, was overlooked. By these means, every mode of
communication between the beleaguered city and the wide and fertile
tracts of land around it, was effectually prevented.  When it is
remembered that this elaborate plan of blockade was enforced against a
place containing, at the lowest possible computation, twelve hundred
thousand inhabitants, destitute of magazines for food within its walls,
dependent for supplies on its regular contributions from the country
without, governed by an irresolute senate, and defended by an enervated
army, the horrors that now impended over the besieged Romans are as
easily imagined as described.


Among the ranks of the army that now surrounded the doomed city, the
division appointed to guard the Pincian Gate will be found, at this
juncture, most worthy of the reader's attention:  for one of the
warriors appointed to its subordinate command was the young chieftain
Hermanric, who had been accompanied by Goisvintha through all the toils
and dangers of the march, since the time when we left him at the
Italian Alps.

The watch had been set, the tents had been pitched, the defences had
been raised on the portion of ground selected to occupy every possible
approach to the Pincian Gate, as Hermanric retired to await by
Goisvintha's side, whatever further commands he might yet be entrusted
with, by his superiors in the Gothic camp.  The spot occupied by the
young warrior's simple tent was on a slight eminence, apart from the
positions chosen by his comrades, eastward of the city gate, and
overlooking at some distance the deserted gardens of the suburbs, and
the stately palaces of the Pincian Hill.  Behind his temporary dwelling
was the open country, reduced to a fertile solitude by the flight of
its terrified inhabitants; and at each side lay one unvarying prospect
of military strength and preparation, stretching out its animated
confusion of soldiers, tents, and engines of warfare, as far as the
sight could reach.  It was now evening.  The walls of Rome, enshrouded
in a rising mist, showed dim and majestic to the eyes of the Goths.
The noises in the beleaguered city softened and deepened, seeming to be
muffled in the growing darkness of the autumn night, and becoming less
and less audible as the vigilant besiegers listened to them from their
respective posts. One by one, lights broke wildly forth at irregular
distances, in the Gothic camp.  Harshly and fitfully the shrill call of
the signal trumpets rang from rank to rank; and through the dim thick
air rose, in the intervals of the more important noises, the clash of
heavy hammers and the shout of martial command. Wherever the
preparations for the blockade were still incomplete, neither the
approach of night nor the pretext of weariness were suffered for an
instant to hinder their continued progress. Alaric's indomitable will
conquered every obstacle of nature, and every deficiency of man.
Darkness had no obscurity that forced him to repose, and lassitude no
eloquence that lured him to delay.

In no part of the army had the commands of the Gothic king been so
quickly and intelligently executed, as in that appointed to watch the
Pincian Gate.  The interview of Hermanric and Goisvintha in the young
chieftain's tent, was, consequently, uninterrupted for a considerable
space of time by any fresh mandate from the head-quarters of the camp.

In outward appearance, both the brother and sister had undergone a
change remarkable enough to be visible, even by the uncertain light of
the torch which now shone on them as they stood together at the door of
the tent.  The features of Goisvintha--which at the period when we
first beheld her on the shores of the mountain lake, retained, in spite
of her poignant sufferings, much of the lofty and imposing beauty that
had been their natural characteristic in her happier days--now
preserved not the slightest traces of their former attractions.  Its
freshness had withered from her complexion, its fulness had departed
from her form. Her eyes had contracted an unvarying sinister expression
of malignant despair, and her manner had become sullen, repulsive, and
distrustful. This alteration in her outward aspect, was but the result
of a more perilous change in the disposition of her heart.  The death
of her last child at the very moment when her flight had successfully
directed her to the protection of her people, had affected her more
fatally than all the losses she had previously sustained.  The
difficulties and dangers that she had encountered in saving her
offspring from the massacre; the dismal certainty that the child was
the only one, out of all the former objects of her affection, left to
her to love; the wild sense of triumph that she experienced in
remembering, that in this single instance her solitary efforts had
thwarted the savage treachery of the Court of Rome, had inspired her
with feelings of devotion towards the last of her household which
almost bordered on insanity.  And, now that her beloved charge, her
innocent victim, her future warrior, had, after all her struggles for
his preservation, pined and died; now that she was childless indeed;
now that Roman cruelty had won its end in spite of all her patience,
all her courage, all her endurance; every noble feeling within her
sunk, annihilated at the shock.  Her sorrow took the fatal form which
irretrievable destroys, in women, all the softer and better
emotions;--it changed to the despair that asks no sympathy, to the
grief that holds no communion with tears.

Less elevated in intellect and less susceptible in disposition, the
change to sullenness of expression and abruptness of manner now visible
in Hermanric, resulted rather from his constant contemplation of
Goisvintha's gloomy despair, than from any actual revolution in his own
character.  In truth, however many might be the points of outward
resemblance now discernible between the brother and sister, the
difference in degree of their moral positions, implied of itself the
difference in degree of the inward sorrow of each.  Whatever the trials
and afflictions that might assail him, Hermanric possessed the
healthful elasticity of youth and the martial occupations of manhood to
support them.  Goisvintha could repose on neither.  With no employment
but bitter remembrance to engage her thoughts, with no kindly
aspiration, no soothing hope to fill her heart, she was abandoned
irrevocably to the influence of unpartaken sorrow and vindictive
despair.

Both the woman and the warrior stood together in silence for some time.
At length, without taking his eyes from the dusky, irregular mass
before him, which was all that night now left visible of the ill-fated
city, Hermanric addressed Goisvintha thus:--

'Have you no words of triumph, as you look on the ramparts that your
people have fought for generations to behold at their mercy, as we now
behold them?  Can a woman of the Goths be silent when she stands before
the city of Rome?'

'I came hither to behold Rome pillaged, and Romans slaughtered; what is
Rome blockaded to me?' replied Goisvintha fiercely.  'The treasures
within that city will buy its safety from our King, as soon as the
tremblers on the ramparts gain heart enough to penetrate a Gothic camp.
Where is the vengeance that you promised me among those distant
palaces? Do I behold you carrying that destruction through the
dwellings of Rome, which the soldiers of yonder city carried through
the dwellings of the Goths?  Is it for plunder or for glory that the
army is here?  I thought, in my woman's delusion, that it was for
revenge!'

'Dishonour will avenge you--Famine will avenge you--Pestilence will
avenge you!'

'They will avenge my nation; they will not avenge me.  I have seen the
blood of Gothic women spilt around me--I have looked on my children's
corpses bleeding at my feet!  Will a famine that I cannot see, and a
pestilence that I cannot watch, give me vengeance for this?  Look!
Here is the helmet-crest of my husband and your brother--the
helmet-crest that was flung to me as a witness that the Romans had
slain him!  Since the massacre of Aquileia it has never quitted my
bosom.  I have sworn that the blood which stains and darkens it, shall
be washed off in the blood of the people of Rome.  Though I should
perish under those accursed walls; though you in your soulless patience
should refuse me protection and aid; I, widowed, weakened, forsaken as
I am, will hold to the fulfilment of my oath!'

As she ceased she folded the crest in her mantle, and turned abruptly
from Hermanric in bitter and undissembled scorn.  All the attributes of
her sex, in thought, expression, and manner, seemed to have deserted
her.  The very tones she spoke in were harsh and unwomanly.


Every word she had uttered, every action she had displayed, had sunk
into the inmost heart, had stirred the fiercest passions of the young
warrior whom she addressed.  The first national sentiment discoverable
in the day-spring of the ages of Gothic history, is the love of war;
but the second is the reverence of woman.  This latter
feeling--especially remarkable among so fierce and unsusceptible a
people as the ancient Scandinavians--was entirely unconnected with
those strong attaching ties, which are the natural consequence of the
warm temperaments of more southern nations; for love was numbered with
the base inferior passions, in the frigid and hardy composition of the
warrior of the north.  It was the offspring of reasoning and
observation, not of instinctive sentiment and momentary impulse.  In
the wild, poetical code of the old Gothic superstition was one axiom,
closely and strangely approximating to an important theory in the
Christian scheme--the watchfulness of an omnipotent Creator over a
finite creature.  Every action of the body, every impulse of the mind,
was the immediate result, in the system of worship among the Goths of
the direct, though invisible interference of the divinities they
adored.  When, therefore, they observed that women were more submitted
in body to the mysterious laws of nature and temperament, and more
swayed in mind by the native and universal instincts of humanity than
themselves, they inferred as an inevitable conclusion, that the female
sex was more incessantly regarded, and more constantly and remarkably
influenced by the gods of their worship, than the male.  Acting under
this persuasion, they committed the study of medicine, the
interpretation of dreams, and in many instances, the mysteries of
communication with the invisible world, to the care of their women.
The gentler sex became their counsellors in difficulty, and their
physicians in sickness--their companions rather than their
mistresses,--the objects of their veneration rather than the purveyors
of their pleasures.  Although in after years, the national migrations
of the Goths changed the national temperament, although their ancient
mythology was exchanged for the worship of Christ, this prevailing
sentiment of their earliest existence as a people never entirely
deserted them; but, with different modifications and in different
forms, maintained much of its old supremacy through all changes of
manners and varieties of customs, descending finally to their posterity
among the present nations of Europe, in the shape of that established
code of universal courtesy to women, which is admitted to be one great
distinguishing mark between the social systems of the inhabitants of
civilised and uncivilised lands.

This powerful and remarkable ascendancy of the woman over the man,
among the Goths, could hardly be more strikingly displayed than in the
instance of Hermanric.  It appeared, not only in the deteriorating
effect of the constant companionship of Goisvintha on his naturally
manly character, but also in the strong influence over his mind of the
last words of fury and disdain that she had spoken.  His eyes gleamed
with anger, his cheeks flushed with shame, as he listened to those
passages in her wrathful remonstrance which reflected most bitterly on
himself.  She had scarcely ceased, and turned to retire into the tent,
when he arrested her progress, and replied, in heightened and accusing
tones:--

'You wrong me by your words!  When I saw you among the Alps, did I
refuse you protection? When the child was wounded, did I leave him to
suffer unaided?  When he died, did I forsake him to rot upon the earth,
or abandon to his mother the digging of his grave?  When we approached
Aquileia, and marched past Ravenna, did I forget that the sword hung at
my shoulder?  Was it at my will that it remained sheathed, or that I
entered not the gates of the Roman towns, but passed by them in haste?
Was it not the command of the king that withheld me? and could I, his
warrior, disobey?  I swear it to you, the vengeance that I promised, I
yearn to perform,--but is it for me to alter the counsels of Alaric?
Can I alone assault the city which it is his command that we should
blockade?  What would you have of me?'

'I would have you remember,' retorted Goisvintha, indignantly, 'that
Romans slew your brother, and made me childless!  I would have you
remember that a public warfare of years on years, is powerless to stay
one hour's craving of private vengeance!  I would have you less
submitted to your general's wisdom, and more devoted to your own
wrongs! I would have you--like me--thirst for the blood of the first
inhabitant of yonder den of traitors, who--whether for peace or for
war--passes the precincts of its sheltering walls!'

She paused abruptly for an answer, but Hermanric uttered not a word.
The courageous heart of the young chieftain recoiled at the deliberate
act of assassination, pressed upon him in Goisvintha's veiled yet
expressive speech. To act with his comrades in taking the city by
assault, to outdo in the heat of battle the worst horrors of the
massacre of Aquileia, would have been achievements in harmony with his
wild disposition and warlike education; but, to submit himself to
Goisvintha's projects, was a sacrifice, that the very peculiarities of
his martial character made repugnant to his thoughts. Emotions such as
these he would have communicated to his companion, as they passed
through his mind; but there was something in the fearful and ominous
change that had occurred in her disposition since he had met her among
the Alps,--in her frantic, unnatural craving for bloodshed and revenge,
that gave her a mysterious and powerful influence over his thoughts,
his words, and even his actions. He hesitated and was silent.

'Have I not been patient?' continued Goisvintha, lowering her voice to
tones of earnest, agitated entreaty, which jarred upon Hermanric's ear,
as he thought who was the petitioner, and what would be the object of
the petition,--' Have I not been patient throughout the weary journey
from the Alps?  Have I not waited for the hour of retribution, even
before the defenceless cities that we passed on the march?  Have I not
at your instigation governed my yearning for vengeance, until the day
that should see you mounting those walls with the warriors of the
Goths, to scourge with fire and sword the haughty traitors of Rome?
Has that day come?  Is it by this blockade that the requital you
promised me over the corpse of my murdered child, is to be performed?
Remember the perils I dared, to preserve the life of that last one of
my household,--and will you risk nothing to avenge his death?  His
sepulchre is untended and solitary.  Far from the dwellings of his
people, lost in the dawn of his beauty, slaughtered in the beginning of
his strength, lies the offspring of your brother's blood.  And the
rest--the two children, who were yet infants; the father, who was brave
in battle and wise in council--where are they?  Their bones whiten on
the shelterless plain, or rot unburied by the ocean shore!  Think--had
they lived--how happily your days would have passed with them in the
time of peace! how gladly your brother would have gone forth with you
to the chase! how joyfully his boys would have nestled at your knees,
to gather from your lips the first lessons that should form them for
the warrior's life!  Think of such enjoyments as these, and then think
that Roman swords have deprived you of them all!'

Her voice trembled, she ceased for a moment, and looked mournfully up
into Hermanric's averted face.  Every feature in the young chieftain's
countenance expressed the tumult that her words had aroused within him.
He attempted to reply, but his voice was powerless in that trying
moment.  His head drooped upon his heaving breast, and he sighed
heavily as, without speaking, he grasped Goisvintha by the hand.  The
object she had pleaded for was nearly attained;--he was fast sinking
beneath the tempter's well-spread toils!

'Are you silent still?' she gloomily resumed.  'Do you wonder at this
longing for vengeance, at this craving for Roman blood?  I tell you
that my desire has arisen within me, at promptings from the voices of
an unknown world.  They urge me to seek requital on the nation who have
widowed and bereaved me--yonder, in their vaunted city, from their
pampered citizens, among their cherished homes--in the spot where their
shameful counsels take root, and whence their ruthless treacheries
derive their bloody source!  In the book that our teachers worship, I
have heard it read, that "the voice of blood crieth from the ground!"
This is the voice--Hermanric, this is the voice that I have heard!  I
have dreamed that I walked on a shore of corpses, by a sea of blood--I
have seen, arising from that sea, my husband's and my children's
bodies, gashed throughout with Roman wounds!  They have called to me
through the vapour of carnage that was around them;--'Are we yet
unavenged?  Is the sword of Hermanric yet sheathed?'  Night after night
have I seen this vision and heard those voice, and hoped for no respite
until the day that saw the army encamped beneath the walls of Rome, and
raising the scaling ladders for the assault!  And now, after all my
endurance, how has that day arrived?  Accursed be the lust of treasure!
It is more to the warriors, and to you, than the justice of revenge!'

'Listen! listen!' cried Hermanric entreatingly.

'I listen no longer!' interrupted Goisvintha.  'The tongue of my people
is as a strange language in my ears; for it talks but of plunder and of
peace, of obedience, of patience, and of hope!  I listen no longer; for
the kindred are gone that I loved to listen to--they are all slain by
the Romans but you--and you I renounce!'


Deprived of all power of consideration by the violence of the emotions
awakened in his heart by Goisvintha's wild revelations of the evil
passion that consumed her, the young Goth, shuddering throughout his
whole frame, and still averting his face, murmured in hoarse, unsteady
accents: 'Ask of me what you will.  I have no words to deny, no power
to rebuke you--ask of me what you will!'

'Promise me,' cried Goisvintha, seizing the hand of Hermanric, and
gazing with a look of fierce triumph on his disordered countenance,
'that this blockade of the city shall not hinder my vengeance!  Promise
me that the first victim of our righteous revenge, shall be the first
one that appears before you--whether in war or peace--of the
inhabitants of Rome!'

'I promise,' cried the Goth.  And those two words sealed the destiny of
his future life.

During the silence that now ensued between Goisvintha and Hermanric,
and while each stood absorbed in deep meditation, the dark prospect
spread around them began to brighten slowly under a soft, clear light.
The moon, whose dull broad disk had risen among the evening mists
arrayed in gloomy red, had now topped the highest of the exhalations of
earth, and beamed in the wide heaven, adorned once more in her pale,
accustomed hue.  Gradually, yet perceptibly, the vapour rolled,--layer
by layer,--from the lofty summits of the palaces of Rome, and the high
places of the mighty city began to dawn, as it were, in the soft,
peaceful, mysterious light; while the lower divisions of the walls, the
desolate suburbs, and parts of the Gothic camp, lay still plunged in
the dusky obscurity of the mist, in grand and gloomy contrast to the
prospect of glowing brightness, that almost appeared to hover about
them from above and around.  Patches of ground behind the tent of
Hermanric, began to grow partially visible in raised and open
positions; and the song of the nightingale was now faintly audible at
intervals, among the solitary and distant trees.  In whatever direction
it was observed, the aspect of nature gave promise of the cloudless,
tranquil night, of the autumnal climate of ancient Italy.

Hermanric was the first to return to the contemplation of the outward
world.  Perceiving that the torch which still burnt by the side of his
tent, had become useless, now that the moon had arisen and dispelled
the mists, he advanced and extinguished it; pausing afterwards to look
forth over the plains, as they brightened slowly before him.  He had
been thus occupied but a short time, when he thought he discerned a
human figure moving slowly over a spot of partially lightened and hilly
ground, at a short distance from him.  It was impossible that this
wandering form could be one of his own people;--they were all collected
at their respective posts, and his tent he knew was on the outermost
boundary of the encampment before the Pincian Gate.

He looked again.  The figure still advanced, but at too great a
distance to allow him a chance of discovering, in the uncertain light
around him, either its nation, its sex, or its age.  His heart misgave
him as he remembered his promise to Goisvintha, and contemplated the
possibility that it was some miserable slave, abandoned by the
fugitives who had quitted the suburbs in the morning, who now
approached as a last resource, to ask mercy and protection from his
enemies in the camp.  He turned towards Goisvintha as the idea crossed
his mind, and observed that she was still occupied in meditation.
Assured by the sight, that she had not yet observed the fugitive
figure, he again directed his attention--with an excess of anxiety
which he could hardly account for--in the direction where he had first
beheld it, but it was no more to be seen.  It had either retired to
concealment, or was now still advancing towards his tent through a
clump of trees that clothed the descent of the hill.

Silently and patiently he continued to look forth over the landscape;
and still no living thing was to be seen.  At length, just as he began
to doubt whether his senses had not deceived him, the fugitive figure
suddenly appeared from the trees, hurried with wavering gait over the
patch of low, damp ground that still separated it from the young Goth,
gained his tent, and then with a feeble cry fell helplessly upon the
earth at his feet.


That cry, faint as it was, attracted Goisvintha's attention.  She
turned in an instant, thrust Hermanric aside, and raised the stranger
in her arms.  The light, slender form, the fair hand and arm hanging
motionless towards the ground, the long locks of deep black hair, heavy
with the moisture of the night atmosphere, betrayed the wanderer's sex
and age in an instant.  The solitary fugitive was a young girl.

Signing to Hermanric to kindle the extinguished torch at a neighbouring
watch-fire, Goisvintha carried the still insensible girl into the tent.
As the Goth silently proceeded to obey her, a vague, horrid suspicion,
that he shrunk from embodying, passed across his mind.  His hand shook
so that he could hardly light the torch, and bold and vigorous as he
was, his limbs trembled beneath him as he slowly returned to the tent.

When he had gained the interior of his temporary abode, the light of
his torch illuminated a strange and impressive scene.

Goisvintha was seated on a rude oaken chest, supporting on her knees
the form of the young girl, and gazing with an expression of the most
intense and enthralling interest upon her pale, wasted countenance.
The tattered robe that had hitherto enveloped the fugitive had fallen
back, and disclosed the white dress, which was the only other garment
she wore.  Her face, throat, and arms, had been turned, by exposure to
the cold, to the pure whiteness of marble.  Her eyes were closed, and
her small, delicate features were locked in a rigid repose.  But for
her deep black hair, which heightened the ghastly aspect of her face,
she might have been mistaken, as she lay in the woman's arms, for an
exquisitely chiseled statue of youth in death!

When the figure of the young warrior, arrayed in his martial
habiliments, and standing near the insensible girl with evident
emotions of wonder and anxiety, was added to the group thus
produced,--when Goisvintha's tall, powerful frame, clothed in dark
garments, and bent over the fragile form and white dress of the
fugitive, was illuminated by the wild, fitful glare of the torch,--when
the heightened colour, worn features, and eager expression of the woman
were beheld, here shadowed, there brightened, in close opposition to
the pale, youthful, reposing countenance of the girl, such an
assemblage of violent lights and deep shades was produced, as gave the
whole scene a character at once mysterious and sublime.  It presented
an harmonious variety of solemn colours, united by the exquisite
artifice of Nature to a grand, yet simple disposition of form.  It was
a picture executed by the hand of Rembrandt, and imagined by the mind
of Raphael.

Starting abruptly from her long, earnest examination of the fugitive,
Goisvintha proceeded to employ herself in restoring animation to her
insensible charge.  While thus occupied, she preserved unbroken
silence. A breathless expectation, that absorbed all her senses in one
direction, seemed to have possessed itself of her heart.  She laboured
at her task with the mechanical, unwavering energy of those, whose
attention is occupied by their thoughts rather than their actions.
Slowly and unwillingly the first faint flush of returning animation
dawned, in the tenderest delicacy of hue, upon the girl's colourless
cheek.  Gradually and softly, her quickening respiration fluttered a
thin lock of hair that had fallen over her face.  A little interval
more, and then the closed, peaceful eyes suddenly opened, and glance
quickly round the tent with a wild expression of bewilderment and
terror.  Then, as Goisvintha rose, and attempted to place her on a
seat, she tore herself from her grasp, looked on her for a moment with
fearful intentness, and then falling on her knees, murmured, in a
plaintive voice,--

'Have mercy upon me.  I am forsaken by my father,--I know not why.  The
gates of the city are shut against me.  My habitation in Rome is closed
to me for ever!'


She had scarcely spoken these few words, before an ominous change
appeared in Goisvintha's countenance.  Its former expression of ardent
curiosity changed to a look of malignant triumph. Her eyes fixed
themselves on the girl's upturned face, in glaring, steady, spell-bound
contemplation.  She gloated over the helpless creature before her, as
the wild beast gloats over the prey that it has secured.  Her form
dilated, a scornful smile appeared on her lips, a hot flush rose on her
cheeks, and ever and anon she whispered softly to herself, 'I knew she
was Roman! Aha!  I knew she was Roman!'

During this space of time Hermanric was silent.  His breath came short
and thick, his face grew pale, and his glance, after resting for an
instant on the woman and the girl, travelled slowly and anxiously round
the tent.  In one corner of it lay a heavy battle-axe.  He looked for a
moment from the weapon to Goisvintha, with a vivid expression of
horror, and then moving slowly across the tent, with a firm, yet
trembling grasp, he possessed himself of the arm.

As he looked up, Goisvintha approached him.  In one hand she held the
bloody helmet-crest, while she pointed with the other to the crouching
form of the girl.  Her lips were still parted with their unnatural
smile, and she whispered softly to the Goth--'Remember your
promise!--remember your kindred!--remember the massacre of Aquileia!'

The young warrior made no answer.  He moved rapidly forward a few
steps, and signed hurriedly to the young girl to fly by the door; but
her terror had by this time divested her of all her ordinary powers of
perception and comprehension.  She looked up vacantly at Hermanric, and
then shuddering violently, crept into a corner of the tent.  During the
short silence that now ensued, the Goth could hear her shiver and sigh,
as he stood watching, with all the anxiety of apprehension,
Goisvintha's darkening brow.

'She is Roman--she is the first dweller in the city who has appeared
before you!--remember your promise!--remember your kindred!--remember
the massacre of Aquileia!' said the woman in fierce, quick,
concentrated tones.

'I remember that I am a warrior and a Goth,' replied Hermanric,
disdainfully.  'I have promised to avenge you, but it must be on a man
that my promise must be fulfilled--an armed man, who can come forth
with weapons in his hand--a strong man of courage whom I will slay in
single combat before your eyes!  The girl is too young to die, too weak
to be assailed!'

Not a syllable that he had spoken had passed unheeded by the fugitive,
every word seemed to revive her torpid faculties.  As he ceased she
arose, and with the quick instinct of terror, ran up to the side of the
young Goth.  Then seizing his hand--the hand that still grasped the
battle-axe--she knelt down and kissed it, uttering hurried broken
ejaculations, as she clasped it to her bosom, which the tremulousness
of her voice rendered completely unintelligible.

'Did the Romans think my children too young to die, or too weak to be
assailed?' cried Goisvintha.  'By the Lord God of Heaven, they murdered
them the more willingly because they were young, and wounded them the
more fiercely because they were weak!  My heart leaps within me as I
look on the girl!  I am doubly avenged, if I am avenged on the innocent
and the youthful!  Her bones shall rot on the plains of Rome, as the
bones of my offspring rot on the plains of Aquileia!  Shed me her
blood!--Remember your promise!--Shed me her blood!'

She advanced with extended arms and gleaming eyes towards the fugitive.
She gasped for breath, her face turned suddenly to a livid paleness,
the torchlight fell upon her distorted features, she looked unearthly
at that fearful moment; but the divinity of mercy had now braced the
determination of the young Goth to meet all emergencies.  His bright
steady eye quailed not for an instant, as he encountered the frantic
glance of the fury before him.  With one hand he barred Goisvintha from
advancing another step; the other, he could not disengage from the
girl, who now clasped and kissed it more eagerly than before.


'You do this but to tempt me to anger,' said Goisvintha, altering her
manner with sudden and palpable cunning, more ominous of peril to the
fugitive than the fury she had hitherto displayed. 'You jest at me,
because I have failed in patience, like a child!  But you will shed her
blood--you are honourable and will hold to your promise--you will shed
her blood!  And I,' she continued, exultingly, seating herself on the
oaken chest that she had previously occupied, and resting her clenched
hands on her knees; 'I will wait to see it!'

At this moment voices and steps were heard outside the tent.  Hermanric
instantly raised the trembling girl from the ground, and supporting her
by his arm, advanced to ascertain the cause of the disturbance.  He was
confronted the next instant by an old warrior of superior rank,
attached to the person of Alaric, who was followed by a small party of
the ordinary soldiery of the camp.

'Among the women appointed by the king to the office of tending, for
this night, those sick and wounded on the march, is Goisvintha, sister
of Hermanric.  If she is here, let her approach and follow me;' said
the chief of the party in authoritative tones, pausing at the door of
the tent.

Goisvintha rose.  For an instant she stood irresolute.  To quit
Hermanric at such a time as this, was a sacrifice that wrung her savage
heart;--but she remembered the severity of Alaric's discipline, she saw
the armed men awaiting her, and yielded after a struggle to the
imperious necessity of obedience to the king's commands.  Trembling
with suppressed anger and bitter disappointment, she whispered to
Hermanric as she passed him:--

'You cannot save her if you would!  You dare not commit her to the
charge of your companions, she is too young and too fair to be
abandoned to their doubtful protection.  You cannot escape with her,
for you must remain here on the watch at your post.  You will not let
her depart by herself, for you know that she would perish with cold and
privation before the morning rises. When I return on the morrow I shall
see her in the tent.  You cannot escape from your promise;--you cannot
forget it,--you must shed her blood!'

'The commands of the king,' said the old warrior, signing to his party
to depart with Goisvintha, who now stood with forced calmness awaiting
their guidance:  'will be communicated to the chieftain Hermanric on
the morrow.  Remember,' he continued in a lower tone, pointing
contemptuously to the trembling girl; 'that the vigilance you have
shown in setting the watch before yonder gate, will not excuse any
negligence your prize there may now cause you to commit!  Consult your
youthful pleasures as you please, but remember your duties!  Farewell!'

Uttering these words in a stern, serious tone, the veteran departed.
Soon the last sound of the footsteps of his escort died away, and
Hermanric and the fugitive were left alone in the tent.

During the address of the old warrior to the chieftain, the girl had
silently detached herself from her protector's support, and retired
hastily to the interior of the tent.  When she saw that they were left
together again, she advanced hesitatingly towards the young Goth, and
looked up with an expression of mute inquiry into his face.

'I am very miserable,' said she, after an interval of silence, in soft,
clear, melancholy accents.  'If you forsake me now, I must die--and I
have lived so short a time on the earth, I have known so little
happiness and so little love, that I am not fit to die!  But you will
protect me!  You are good and brave, strong with weapons in your hands,
and full of pity.  You have defended me, and spoken kindly of me--I
love you for the compassion you have shown me.'


Her language and actions, simple as they were, were yet so new to
Hermanric, whose experience of her sex had been almost entirely limited
to the women of his own stern impassive nation, that he could only
reply by a brief assurance of protection, when the suppliant awaited
his answer.  A new page in the history of humanity was opening before
his eyes, and he scanned it in wondering silence.


'If that woman should return,' pursued the girl, fixing her dark,
eloquent eyes intently upon the Goth's countenance, 'take me quickly
where she cannot come.  My heart grows cold as I look on her!  She will
kill me if she can approach me again!  My father's anger is very
fearful, but hers is horrible--horrible--horrible!  Hush! already I
hear her coming back--let us go--I will follow you wherever you
please--but let us not delay while there is time to depart!  She will
destroy me if she sees me now, and I cannot die yet!  Oh my preserver,
my compassionate defender, I cannot die yet!'

'No one shall harm you--no on shall approach you to-night--you are
secure from all dangers in this tent,' said the Goth, gazing on her
with undissembled astonishment and admiration.

'I will tell you why death is so dreadful to me,' she continued, and
her voice deepened as she spoke, to tones of mournful solemnity,
strangely impressive in a creature so young.  'I have lived much alone,
and have had no companions but my thoughts, and the sky that I could
look up to, and the things on the earth that I could watch.  As I have
seen the clear heaven and the soft fields, and smelt the perfume of
flowers, and heard the voices of singing-birds afar off, I have
wondered why the same God who made all this, and made me, should have
made grief and pain and hell--the dread eternal hell that my father
speaks of in his church.  I never looked at the sun-light, or woke from
my sleep to look on and to think of the distant stars, but I longed to
love something that might listen to my joy.  But my father forbade me
to be happy!  He frowned even when he gave me my flower-garden--though
God made flowers.  He destroyed my lute--though God made music.  My
life has been a longing in loneliness for the voices of friends!  My
heart has swelled and trembled within me, because when I walked in the
garden and looked on the plains and woods and high, bright mountains
that were round me, I knew that I loved them alone!  Do you know now
why I dare not die?  It is because I must find first the happiness
which I feel God has made for me.  It is because I must live to praise
this wonderful, beautiful world with others who enjoy it as I could!
It is because my home has been among those who sigh, and never among
those who smile!  It is for this that I fear to die!  I must find
companions whose prayers are in singing and in happiness, before I go
to the terrible hereafter that all dread.  I dare not die!  I dare not
die!'

As she uttered these last words she began to weep bitterly.  Between
amazement and compassion the young Goth was speechless.  He looked down
upon the small, soft hand that she had placed on his arm while she
spoke, and saw that it trembled; he pressed it, and felt that it was
cold; and in the first impulse of pity produced by the action, he found
the readiness of speech which he had hitherto striven for in vain.

'You shiver and look pale,' said he; 'a fire shall be kindled at the
door of the tent.  I will bring you garments that will warm you, and
food that will give you strength; you shall sleep, and I will watch
that no one harms you.'

The girl hastily looked up.  An expression of ineffable gratitude
overspread her sorrowful countenance.  She murmured in a broken voice,
'Oh, how merciful, how merciful you are!'  And then, after an evident
struggle with herself, she covered her face with her hands, and again
burst into tears.

More and more embarrassed, Hermanric mechanically busied himself in
procuring from such of his attendants as the necessities of the
blockade left free, the supplies of fire, food and raiment, which he
had promised.  She received the coverings, approached the blazing fuel,
and partook of the simple refreshment, which the young warrior offered
her, with eagerness.  After that she sat for some time silent, absorbed
in deep meditation, and cowering over the fire, apparently unconscious
of the curiosity with which she was still regarded by the Goth.  At
length she suddenly looked up, and observing his eyes fixed on her,
arose and beckoned him to the seat that she occupied.

'Did you know how utterly forsaken I am,' said she, 'you would not
wonder as you do, that I, a stranger and a Roman, have sought you thus.
I have told you how lonely was my home; but yet that home was a refuge
and a protection to me until the morning of this long day that is past,
when I was expelled from it for ever!  I was suddenly awakened in my
bed by--my father entered in anger--he called me--'

She hesitated, blushed, and then paused at the very outset of her
narrative.  Innocent as she was, the natural instincts of her sex
spoke, though in a mysterious yet in a warning tone, within her heart,
abruptly imposing on her motives for silence that she could neither
penetrate nor explain. She clasped her trembling hands over her bosom
as if to repress its heaving, and casting down her eyes, continued in a
lower tone:--

'I cannot tell you why my father drove me from his doors.  He has
always been silent and sorrowful to me; setting me long tasks in
mournful books; commanding that I should not quit the precincts of his
abode, and forbidding me to speak to him when I have sometimes asked
him to tell me of my mother whom I have lost.  Yet he never threatened
me or drove me from his side, until the morning of which I have told
you.  Then his wrath was terrible; his eyes were fierce; his voice was
threatening!  He bade me begone, and I obeyed him in affright, for I
thought he would have slain me if I stayed!  I fled from the house,
knowing not where I went, and ran through yonder gate, which is hard by
our abode.  As I entered the suburbs, I met great crowds, all hurrying
into Rome.  I was bewildered by my fears and the confusion all around,
yet I remember that they called loudly to me to fly to the city, ere
the gates were closed against the assault of the Goths.  And others
jostled and scoffed at me, as they passed by and saw me in the thin
night garments in which I was banished from my home!'

Here she paused and listened intently for a few moments.  Every
accidental noise that she heard still awakened in her the apprehension
of Goisvintha's return.  Reassured by Hermanric and by her own
observation of all that was passing outside the tent, she resumed her
narrative after an interval, speaking now in a steadier voice.

'I thought my heart would burst within me,' she continued, 'as I tried
to escape them.  All things whirled before my eyes.  I could not
speak--I could not stop--I could not weep.  I fled and fled I knew not
whither, until I sank down exhausted at the door of a small house on
the outskirts of the suburbs.  Then I called for aid, but no one was by
to hear me.  I crept--for I could stand no longer--into the house.  It
was empty.  I looked from the windows:  no human figure passed through
the silent streets.  The roar of a mighty confusion still rose from the
walls of the city, but I was left to listen to it alone.  In the house
I saw scattered on the floor some fragments of bread and an old
garment. I took them both, and then rose and departed; for the silence
of the place was horrible to me, and I remembered the fields and the
plains that I had once loved to look on, and I thought that I might
find there the refuge that had been denied to me at Rome! So I set
forth once more; and when I gained the soft grass, and sat down beside
the shady trees, and saw the sunlight brightening over the earth, my
heart grew sad, and I wept as I thought on my loneliness and remembered
my father's anger.

'I had not long remained in my resting-place, when I heard a sound of
trumpets in the distance, and looking forth, I saw far off, advancing
over the plains, a mighty multitude with arms that glittered in the
sun. I strove, as I beheld them, to arise and return even to those
suburbs whose solitude had affrighted me.  But my limbs failed me.  I
saw a little hollow hidden among the trees around.  I entered it, and
there throughout the lonely day I lay concealed.  I heard the long
tramp of footsteps, as your army passed me on the roads beneath; and
then, after those hours of fear came the weary hours of solitude!


'Oh, those--lonely--lonely--lonely hours!  I have lived without
companions, but those hours were more terrible to me than all the years
of my former life!  I dared not venture to leave my hiding-place--I
dared not call!  Alone in the world, I crouched in my refuge till the
sun went down!  Then came the mist, and the darkness, and the cold.
The bitter winds of night thrilled through and through me!  The lonely
obscurity around me seemed filled with phantoms whom I could not
behold, who touched me and rustled over the surface of my skin!  They
half maddened me!  I rose to depart; to meet my wrathful father, or the
army that had passed me, or solitude in the cold, bright meadows--I
cared not which!--when I discerned the light of your torch, the moment
ere it was extinguished.  Dark though it then was, I found your tent.
And now I know that I have found yet more--a companion and a friend!'

She looked up at the young Goth as she pronounced these words with the
same grateful expression that had appeared on her countenance before;
but this time her eyes were not dimmed by tears. Already her
disposition--poor as was the prospect of happiness which now lay before
it--had begun to return, with an almost infantine facility of change,
to the restoring influences of the brighter emotions. Already the short
tranquilities of the present began to exert for her their effacing
charm over the long agitations of the past. Despair was unnumbered
among the emotions that grew round that child-like heart; shame, fear,
and grief, however they might overshadow it for a time, left no taint
of their presence on its bright, fine surface. Tender, perilously alive
to sensation, strangely retentive of kindness as she was by nature, the
very solitude to which she had been condemned had gifted her, young as
she was, with a martyr's endurance of ill, and with a stoic's patience
under pain.

'Do not mourn for me now,' she pursued, gently interrupting some broken
expressions of compassion which fell from the lips of the young Goth.
'If you are merciful to me, I shall forget all that I have suffered!
Though your nation is at enmity with mine, while you remain my friend,
I fear nothing!  I can look on your great stature, and heavy sword, and
bright armour now without trembling!  You are not like the soldiers of
Rome;--you are taller, stronger, more gloriously arrayed!  You are like
a statue I once saw by chance of a warrior of the Greeks!  You have a
look of conquest and a presence of command!'

She gazed on the manly and powerful frame of the young warrior, clothed
as it was in the accoutrements of his warlike nation, with an
expression of childish interest and astonishment, asking him the
appellation and use of each part of his equipment, as it attracted her
attention, and ending her inquiries by eagerly demanding his name.

'Hermanric,' she repeated, as he answered her, pronouncing with some
difficulty the harsh Gothic syllables--'Hermanric!--that is a stern,
solemn name--a name fit for a warrior and a man!  Mine sounds
worthless, after such a name as that!  It is only Antonina!'

Deeply as he was interested in every word uttered by the girl,
Hermanric could no longer fail to perceive the evident traces of
exhaustion that now appeared in the slightest of her actions.
Producing some furs from a corner of the tent, he made a sort of rude
couch by the side of the fire, heaped fresh fuel on the flames, and
then gently counselled her to recruit her wasted energies by repose.
There was something so candid in his manner, so sincere in the tones of
his voice, as he made his simple offer of hospitality to the stranger
who had taken refuge with him, that the most distrustful woman would
have accepted with as little hesitation as Antonina; who, gratefully
and unhesitatingly, laid down on the bed that he had been spreading for
her at her feet.

As soon as he had carefully covered her with a cloak, and rearranged
her couch in the position best calculated to insure her all the warmth
of the burning fuel, Hermanric retired to the other side of the fire;
and, leaning on his sword, abandoned himself to the new and absorbing
reflections which the presence of the girl naturally aroused.

He thought not on the duties demanded of him by the blockade; he
remembered neither the scene of rage and ferocity that had followed his
evasion of his reckless promise; nor the fierce determination that
Goisvintha had expressed as she quitted him for the night.  The cares
and toils to come with the new morning, which would oblige him to
expose the fugitive to the malignity of her revengeful enemy; the
thousand contingencies that the difference of their sexes, their
nations, and their lives, might create to oppose the continuance of the
permanent protection that he had promised to her, caused him no
forebodings. Antonina, and Antonina alone, occupied every faculty of
his mind, and every feeling of his heart.  There was a softness and a
melody to his ear in her very name!


His early life had made him well acquainted with the Latin tongue, but
he had never discovered all its native smoothness of sound, and
elegance of structure, until he had heard it spoken by Antonina.  Word
by word, he passed over in his mind her varied, natural, and happy
turns of expression; recalling, as he was thus employed, the eloquent
looks, the rapid gesticulations, the changing tones which had
accompanied those words, and thinking how wide was the difference
between this young daughter of Rome, and the cold and taciturn women of
his own nation. The very mystery enveloping her story, which would have
excited the suspicion or contempt of more civilised men, aroused in him
no other emotions than those of wonder and compassion.  No feelings of
a lower nature than these entered his heart towards the girl.  She was
safe under the protection of the enemy and the barbarian, after having
been lost through the interference of the Roman and the senator.

To the simple perceptions of the Goth, the discovery of so much
intelligence united to such extreme youth, of so much beauty doomed to
such utter loneliness, was the discovery of an apparition that dazzled,
and not of a woman who charmed him.  He could not even have touched the
hand of the helpless creature, who now reposed under his tent, unless
she had extended it to him of her own accord.  He could only
think--with a delight whose excess he was far from estimating
himself--on this solitary mysterious being who had come to him for
shelter and for aid; who had awakened in him already new sources of
sensation; and who seemed to his startled imagination to have suddenly
twined herself for ever about the destinies of his future life.

He was still deep in meditation, when he was startled by a hand
suddenly laid on his arm.  He looked up and saw that Antonina, whom he
had imagined to be slumbering on her couch, was standing by his side.

'I cannot sleep,' said the girl in a low, awe-struck voice, 'until I
have asked you to spare my father when you enter Rome.  I know that you
are here to ravage the city; and, for aught I can tell, you may assault
and destroy it to-night.  Will you promise to warn me before the walls
are assailed? I will then tell you my father's name and abode, and you
will spare him as you have mercifully spared me?  He has denied me his
protection, but he is my father still; and I remember that I disobeyed
him once, when I possessed myself of a lute!  Will you promise me to
spare him?  My mother, whom I have never seen and who must therefore be
dead, may love me in another world for pleading for my father's life!'

In a few words, Hermanric quieted her agitation by explaining to her
the nature and intention of the Gothic blockade, and she silently
returned to the couch.  After a short interval, her slow, regular
breathing announced to the young warrior, as he watched by the side of
the fire, that she had at length forgotten the day's heritage of
misfortune in the welcome oblivion of sleep.



CHAPTER 9.

THE TWO INTERVIEWS.

The time, is the evening of the first day of the Gothic blockade; the
place, is Vetranio's palace at Rome.  In one of the private apartments
of his mansion is seated its all-accomplished owner, released at length
from the long sitting convened by the Senate on the occasion of the
unexpected siege of the city.  Although the same complete discipline,
the same elegant regularity, and the same luxurious pomp, which
distinguished the senator's abode in times of security, still prevail
over it in the time of imminent danger which now threatens rich and
poor alike in Rome, Vetranio himself appears far from partaking the
tranquility of his patrician household.  His manner displays an unusual
sternness, and his face an unwonted displeasure, as he sits, occupied
by his silent reflections and thoroughly unregardful of whatever occurs
around him.  Two ladies who are his companions in the apartment, exert
all their blandishments to win him back to hilarity, but in vain.  The
services of his expectant musicians are not put into requisition, the
delicacies on his table remain untouched, and even 'the inestimable
kitten of the breed most worshipped by the ancient Egyptians' gambols
unnoticed and unapplauded at his feet.  All its wonted philosophical
equanimity has evidently departed, for the time at least, from the
senator's mind.

Silence--hitherto a stranger to the palace apartments--had reigned
uninterruptedly over them for some time, when the freedman Carrio
dissipated Vetranio's meditations, and put the ladies who were with him
to flight, by announcing in an important voice, that the Prefect
Pompeianus desired a private interview with the Senator Vetranio.

The next instant the chief magistrate of Rome entered the apartment.
He was a short, fat, undignified man.  Indolence and vacillation were
legibly impressed on his appearance and expression.  You saw, in a
moment, that his mind, like a shuttlecock, might be urged in any
direction by the efforts of others, but was utterly incapable of
volition by itself.  But once in his life had the Prefect Pompeianus
been known to arrive unaided at a positive determination, and that was
in deciding a fierce argument between a bishop and a general, regarding
the relative merits of two rival rope-dancers of equal renown.

'I have come, my beloved friend,' said the Prefect in agitated tones,
'to ask your opinion, at this period of awful responsibility for us
all, on the plan of operations proposed by the Senate at the sitting of
to-day!  But first,' he hastily continued, perceiving with the unerring
instinct of an old gastronome, that the inviting refreshments on
Vetranio's table had remained untouched, 'permit me to fortify my
exhausted energies by a visit to your ever-luxurious board.  Alas, my
friend, when I consider the present fearful scarcity of our provision
stores in the city, and the length of time that this accursed blockade
may be expected to last, I am inclined to think that the gods alone
know (I mean St. Peter) how much longer we may be enabled to give
occupation to our digestions and employment to our cooks.

'I have observed,' pursued the Prefect, after an interval, speaking
with his mouth full of stewed peacock; 'I have observed, oh esteemed
colleague! the melancholy of your manner and your absolute silence
during your attendance to-day at our deliberations.  Have we, in your
opinion, decided erroneously?  It is not impossible!  Our confusion at
this unexpected appearance of the barbarians may have blinded our usual
penetration!  If by any chance you dissent from our plans, I beseech
you communicate your objections to me without reserve!'

'I dissent from nothing, because I have heard nothing,' replied
Vetranio sullenly.  'I was so occupied by a private matter of
importance during my attendance at the sitting of the Senate, that I
was deaf to their deliberations.  I know that we are besieged by the
Goths--why are they not driven from before the walls?'

'Deaf to our deliberations!  Drive the Goths from the walls!' repeated
the Prefect faintly.  'Can you think of any private matter at such a
moment as this?  Do you know our danger?  Do you know that our friends
are so astonished at this frightful calamity, that they move about like
men half awakened from a dream?  Have you not seen the streets filled
with terrified and indignant crowds? Have you not mounted the ramparts
and beheld the innumerable multitudes of pitiless Goths surrounding us
on all sides, intercepting our supplies of provisions from the country,
and menacing us with a speedy famine, unless our hoped-for auxiliaries
arrive from Ravenna?'

'I have neither mounted the ramparts, nor viewed with any attention the
crowds in the streets,' replied Vetranio, carelessly.

'But if you have seen nothing yourself, you must have heard what others
saw,' persisted the Prefect; 'you must know at least that the legions
we have in the city are not sufficient to guard more than half the
circuit of the walls.  Has no one informed you that if it should please
the leader of the barbarians to change his blockade into an assault, it
is more than probable that we should be unable to repulse him
successfully? Are you still deaf to our deliberations, when your palace
may to-morrow be burnt over your head, when we may be staved to death,
when we may be doomed to eternal dishonour by being driven to conclude
a peace?  Deaf to our deliberations, when such an unimaginable calamity
as this invasion has fallen like a thunderbolt under our very walls!
You amaze me!  You overwhelm me!  You horrify me!'


And in the excess of his astonishment the bewildered Prefect actually
abandoned his stewed peacock, and advanced, wine-cup in hand, to obtain
a nearer view of the features of his imperturbable host.

'If we are not strong enough to drive the Goths out of Italy,' rejoined
Vetranio coolly, 'you and the Senate know that we are rich enough to
bribe them to depart to the remotest confines of the empire.  If we
have not swords enough to fight, we have gold and silver enough to pay.'

'You are jesting!  Remember our honour and the auxiliaries we still
hope for from Ravenna,' said the Prefect reprovingly.

'Honour has lost the signification now, that it had in the time of the
Caesars,' retorted the Senator. 'Our fighting days are over.  We have
had heroes enough for our reputation.  As for the auxiliaries you still
hope for, you will have none!  While the Emperor is safe in Ravenna, he
will care nothing for the worst extremities that can be suffered by the
people of Rome.'

'But you forget your duties,' urged the astonished Pompeianus, turning
from rebuke to expostulation.  'You forget that it is a time when all
private interests must be abandoned!  You forget that I have come here
to ask your advice, that I am bewildered by a thousand projects, forced
on me from all sides, for ruling the city successfully during the
blockade; that I look to you, as a friend and a man of reputation, to
aid me in deciding on a choice out of the varied counsels submitted to
me in the Senate to-day.'

'Write down the advice of each senator on a separate strip of vellum;
shake all the strips together in an urn; and then, let the first you
take out by chance, be your guide to govern by in the present condition
of the city!' said Vetranio with a sneer.

'Oh friend, friend! it is cruel to jest with me thus!' cried the
Prefect, in tones of lament; 'Would you really persuade me that you are
ignorant that what sentinels we have, are doubled already on the walls?
Would you attempt to declare seriously to me, that you never heard the
project of Saturninus for reducing imperceptibly the diurnal allowance
of provisions?  Or the recommendation of Emilianus, that the people
should be kept from thinking on the dangers and extremities which now
threaten them, by being provided incessantly with public amusements at
the theatres and hippodromes?  Do you really mean that you are
indifferent to the horrors of our present situation?  By the souls of
the Apostles, Vetranio, I begin to think that you do not believe in the
Goths!'

'I have already told you that private affairs occupy me at present, to
the exclusion of public,' said Vetranio impatiently.  'Debate as you
choose--approve what projects you will--I withdraw myself from
interference in your deliberations!'


'This,' murmured the repulsed Prefect in soliloquy, as he mechanically
resumed his place at the refreshment table, 'this is the very end and
climax of all calamities!  Now, when advice and assistance are more
precious than jewels in my estimation, I receive neither!  I gain from
none, the wise and saving counsels which, as chief magistrate of this
Imperial City, it is my right to demand from all; and the man on whom I
most depended is the man who fails me most!  Yet hear me, oh Vetranio,
once again,' he continued, addressing the Senator, 'if our perils
beyond the walls affect you not, there is a weighty matter that has
been settled within them, which must move you.  After you had quitted
the Senate, Serena, the widow of Stilicho, was accused, as her husband
was accused before her, of secret and treasonable correspondence with
the Goths; and has been condemned, as her husband was condemned, to
suffer the penalty of death.  I myself discerned no evidence to convict
her; but the populace cried out, in universal frenzy, that she was
guilty, that she should die; and that the barbarians, when they heard
of the punishment inflicted on their secret adherent, would retire in
dismay from Rome.  This also was a moot point of argument, on which I
vainly endeavoured to decide; but the Senate and the people were wiser
than I; and Serena was condemned to be strangled to-morrow by the
public executioner.  She was a woman of good report before this time,
and is the adopted mother of the Emperor.  It is now doubted by many
whether Stilicho, her husband, was ever guilty of the correspondence
with the Goths, of which he was accused; and I, on my part, doubt much
that Serena has deserved the punishment of death at our hands.  I
beseech you, Vetranio, let me be enlightened by your opinion on this
one point at least!'

The Prefect waited anxiously for an answer, but Vetranio neither looked
at him nor replied.  It was evident that the Senator had not listened
to a word that he had said!

This reception of his final appeal for assistance, produced the effect
on the petitioner, which it was perhaps designed to convey--the Prefect
Pompeianus quitted the room in despair.

He had not long departed, when Carrio again entered the apartment, and
addressed his master thus:

'It is grievous for me, revered patron, to disclose it to you, but your
slaves have returned unsuccessful from the search!'

'Give the description of the girl to a fresh division of them, and let
them continue their efforts throughout the night, not only in the
streets, but in all the houses of public entertainment in the city.
She must be in Rome, and she must be found!' said the senator gloomily.

Carrio bowed profoundly, and was about to depart, when he was arrested
at the door by his master's voice.

'If an old man, calling himself Numerian, should desire to see me,'
said Vetranio, 'admit him instantly.'

'She had quitted the room but a short time when I attempted to reclaim
her,' pursued the senator, speaking to himself; 'and yet when I gained
the open air, she was nowhere to be seen!  She must have mingled
unintentionally with the crowds whom the Goths drove into the city, and
thus have eluded my observation!  So young and so innocent!  She must
be found!  She must be found!'

He paused, once more engrossed in deep and melancholy thought.  After a
long interval, he was roused from his abstraction by the sound of
footsteps on the marble floor.  He looked up.  The door had been opened
without his perceiving it, and an old man was advancing with slow and
trembling steps towards his silken couch.  It was the bereaved and
broken-hearted Numerian.

'Where is she?  Is she found?' asked the father, gazing anxiously round
the room, as if he had expected to see his daughter there.

'My slaves still search for her,' said Vetranio, mournfully.

'Ah, woe--woe--woe!  How I wronged her!  How I wronged her!' cried the
old man, turning to depart.


'Listen to me ere you go,' said Vetranio, gently detaining him.  'I
have done you a great wrong, but I will yet atone for it by finding for
you your child!  While there were women who would have triumphed in my
admiration, I should not have attempted to deprive you of your
daughter! Remember when you recover her--and you shall recover
her--that from the time when I first decoyed her into listening to my
lute, to the night when your traitorous servant led me to her
bed-chamber, she has been innocent in this ill-considered matter.  I
alone have been guilty!  She was scarcely awakened when you discovered
her in my arms, and my entry into her chamber, was as little expected
by her, as it was by you.  I was bewildered by the fumes of wine and
the astonishment of your sudden appearance, or I should have rescued
her from your anger, ere it was too late!  The events which have passed
this morning, confused though they were, have yet convinced me that I
had mistaken you both.  I now know that your child was too pure to be
an object fitted for my pursuit; and I believe that in secluding her as
you did, however ill-advised you might appear, you were honest in your
design!  Never in my pursuit of pleasure did I commit so fatal an
error, as when I entered the doors of your house!'

In pronouncing these words, Vetranio but gave expression to the
sentiments by which they were really inspired.  As we have before
observed, profligate as he was by thoughtlessness of character and
license of social position, he was neither heartless nor criminal by
nature.  Fathers had stormed, but his generosity had hitherto
invariably pacified them.  Daughters had wept, but had found
consolation on all previous occasions in the splendour of his palace
and the amiability of his disposition.  In attempting, therefore, the
abduction of Antonina, though he had prepared for unusual obstacles, he
had expected no worse results of his new conquest, than those that had
followed, as yet, his gallantries that were past.  But, when--in the
solitude of his own home, and in the complete possession of his
faculties--he recalled all the circumstances of his attempt, from the
time when he had stolen on the girl's slumbers, to the moment when she
had fled from the house; when he remembered the stern concentrated
anger of Numerian, and the agony and despair of Antonina; when he
thought on the spirit-broken repentance of the deceived father, and the
fatal departure of the injured daughter, he felt as a man who had not
merely committed an indiscretion, but had been guilty of a crime; he
became convinced that he had incurred the fearful responsibility of
destroying the happiness of a parent who was really virtuous, and a
child who was truly innocent.  To a man, the business of whose whole
life was to procure for himself a heritage of unalloyed pleasure, whose
sole occupation was to pamper that refined sensuality which the habits
of a life had made the very material of his heart, by diffusing luxury
and awakening smiles wherever he turned his steps, the mere mental
disquietude attending the ill-success of his intrusion into Numerian's
dwelling, was as painful in its influence, as the bitterest remorse
that could have afflicted a more highly-principled mind.  He now,
therefore, instituted the search after Antonina, and expressed his
contrition to her father, from a genuine persuasion that nothing but
the completest atonement for the error he had committed, could restore
to him that luxurious tranquility, the loss of which had, as he had
himself expressed it, rendered him deaf to the deliberations of the
Senate, and regardless of the invasion of the Goths.

'Tell me,' he continued, after a pause, 'whither has Ulpius betaken
himself?  It is necessary that he should be discovered.  He may
enlighten us upon the place of Antonina's retreat.  He shall be secured
and questioned.'

'He left me suddenly; I saw him as I stood at the window, mix with the
multitude in the street, but I know not whither he is gone,' replied
Numerian; and a tremor passed over his whole frame as he spoke of the
remorseless Pagan.

Again there was a short silence.  The grief of the broken-spirited
father, possessed in its humility and despair, a voice of rebuke,
before which the senator, careless and profligate as he was,
instinctively quailed.  For some time he endeavoured in vain to combat
the silencing and reproving influence, exerted over him by the very
presence of the sorrowing man whom he had so fatally wronged.  At
length, after an interval, he recovered self-possession enough to
address to Numerian some further expressions of consolation and hope;
but he spoke to ears that listened not.  The father had relapsed into
his mournful abstraction; and when the senator paused, he merely
muttered to himself--'She is lost!  Alas, she is lost for ever!'

'No, she is not lost for ever,' cried Vetranio, warmly.  'I have wealth
and power enough to cause her to be sought for to the ends of the
earth! Ulpius shall be secured and questioned--imprisoned, tortured, if
it is necessary.  Your daughter shall be recovered.  Nothing is
impossible to a senator of Rome!'


'I knew not that I loved her, until the morning when I wronged and
banished her!' continued the old man, still speaking to himself.  'I
have lost all traces of my parents and my brother--my wife is parted
from me for ever--I have nothing left but Antonina; and now too she is
gone!  Even my ambition, that I once thought my all in all, is no
comfort to my soul; for I loved it--alas! unconsciously loved
it--through the being of my child!  I destroyed her lute--I thought her
shameless--I drove her from my doors!  Oh, how I wronged her!--how I
wronged her!'

'Remain here, and repose yourself in one of the sleeping apartments,
until my slaves return in the morning.  You will then hear without
delay of the result of their search to-night,' said Vetranio, in kindly
and compassionate tones.

'It grows dark--dark!' groaned the father, tottering towards the door;
'but that is nothing; daylight itself now looks darkness to me!  I must
go:  I have duties at the chapel to perform.  Night is repose for
you--for me, it is tribulation and prayer!'

He departed as he spoke.  Slowly he paced along the streets that led to
his chapel, glancing with penetrating eye at each inhabitant of the
besieged city who passed him on his way.  With some difficulty he
arrived at his destination; for Rome was still thronged with armed men
hurrying backwards and forwards, and with crowds of disorderly citizens
pouring forth, wherever there was space enough for them to assemble.
The report of the affliction that had befallen him had already gone
abroad among his hearers, and they whispered anxiously to each other as
he entered the plain, dimly-lighted chapel, and slowly mounted the
pulpit to open the service, by reading the chapter in the Bible which
had been appointed for perusal that night, and which happened to be the
fifth of the Gospel of St. Mark.  His voice trembled, his face was
ghastly pale, and his hands shook perceptibly as he began; but he read
on, in low, broken tones, and with evident pain and difficulty, until
he came to the verse containing these words:  'My little daughter lieth
at the point of death.'  Here he stopped suddenly, endeavoured vainly
for a few minutes to proceed, and then, covering his face with his
hands, sank down in the pulpit and sobbed aloud. His sorrowing and
startled audience immediately gathered round him, raised him in their
arms, and prepared to conduct him to his own abode.  When, however,
they had gained the door of the chapel, he desired them gently, to
leave him and return to the performance of the service among
themselves.  Ever implicitly obedient to his slightest wishes, the
persons of his little assembly, moved to tears by the sight of their
teacher's suffering, obeyed him, by retiring silently to their former
places.  As soon as he found that he was alone, he passed the door; and
whispering to himself, 'I must join those who seek her!  I must aid
them myself in the search!'--he mingled once more with the disorderly
citizens who thronged the darkened streets.



CHAPTER 10.

THE RIFT IN THE WALL.

When Ulpius suddenly departed from Numerian's house on the morning of
the siege, it was with no distinct intention of betaking himself to any
particular place, or devoting himself to any immediate employment.  It
was to give vent to his joy--to the ecstacy that now filled his heart
to bursting--that he sought the open streets.  His whole moral being
was exalted by that overwhelming sense of triumph, which urges the
physical nature into action.  He hurried into the free air, as a child
runs on a bright day in the wide fields; his delight was too wild to
expand under a roof; his excess of bliss swelled irrepressibly beyond
all artificial limits of space.


The Goths were in sight!  A few hours more, and their scaling ladders
would be planted against the walls.  On a city so weakly guarded as
Rome, their assault must be almost instantaneously successful.
Thirsting for plunder, they would descend in infuriated multitudes on
the defenceless streets.  Christians though they were, the restraints
of religion would, in that moment of fierce triumph, be powerless with
such a nation of marauders against the temptations to pillage.
Churches would be ravaged and destroyed; priests would be murdered in
attempting the defence of their ecclesiastical treasures; fire and
sword would waste to its remotest confines the stronghold of
Christianity, and overwhelm in death and oblivion the boldest of
Christianity's devotees! Then, when the hurricane of ruin and crime had
passed over the city, when a new people were ripe for another
government and another religion--then would be the time to invest the
banished gods of old Rome with their former rule; to bid the survivors
of the stricken multitude remember the judgment that their apostacy to
their ancient faith had demanded and incurred; to strike the very
remembrance of the Cross out of the memory of man; and to reinstate
Paganism on her throne of sacrifices, and under her roof of gold, more
powerful from her past persecutions; more universal in her sudden
restoration, than in all the glories of her ancient rule!

Such thoughts as these passed through the Pagan's toiling mind as,
unobservant of all outward events, he paced through the streets of the
beleaguered city.  Already he beheld the array of the Goths preparing
the way, as the unconscious pioneers of the returning gods, for the
march of that mighty revolution which he was determined to lead.  The
warmth of his past eloquence, the glow of his old courage, thrilled
through his heart, as he figured to himself the prospect that would
soon stretch before him--a city laid waste, a people terrified, a
government distracted, a religion destroyed.  Then, arising amid this
darkness and ruin; amid this solitude, desolation, and decay, it would
be his glorious privilege to summon an unfaithful people to return to
the mistress of their ancient love; to rise from prostration beneath a
dismantled Church; and to seek prosperity in temples repeopled and at
shrines restored!

All remembrance of late events now entirely vanished from his mind.
Numerian, Vetranio, Antonina, they were all forgotten in this memorable
advent of the Goths!  His slavery in the mines, his last visit to
Alexandria, his earlier wanderings--even these, so present to his
memory until the morning of the siege, were swept from its very surface
now. Age, solitude, infirmity--hitherto the mournful sensations which
were proofs to him that he still continued to exist--suddenly vanished
from his perceptions, as things that were not; and now at length he
forgot that he was an outcast, and remembered triumphantly that he was
still a priest.  He felt animated by the same hopes, elevated by the
same aspirations, as in those early days when he had harangued the
wavering Pagans in the Temple, and first plotted the overthrow of the
Christian Church.

It was a terrible and warning proof of the omnipotent influence that a
single idea may exercise over a whole life, to see that old man
wandering among the crowds around him, still enslaved, after years of
suffering and solitude, degradation, and crime, by the same ruling
ambition, which had crushed the promise of his early youth!  It was an
awful testimony to the eternal and mysterious nature of thought, to
behold that wasted and weakened frame; and then to observe how the
unassailable mind within still swayed the wreck of body yet left to
it--how faithfully the last exhausted resources of failing vigour
rallied into action at its fierce command--how quickly, at its mocking
voice, the sunken eye lightened again with a gleam of hope, and the
pale, thin lips parted mechanically with an exulting smile!

The hours passed, but he still walked on--whither or among whom he
neither knew nor cared.  No remorse touched his heart for the
destruction that he had wreaked on the Christian who had sheltered him;
no terror appalled his soul at the contemplation of the miseries that
he believed to be in preparation for the city from the enemy at its
gates. The end that had hallowed to him the long series of his former
offences and former sufferings, now obliterated iniquities just passed,
and stripped of all their horrors, atrocities immediately to come.

The Goths might be destroyers to others, but they were benefactors to
him; for they were harbingers of the ruin which would be the material
of his reform, and the source of his triumph. It never entered his
imagination that, as an inhabitant of Rome, he shared the approaching
perils of the citizens, and in the moment of the assault might share
their doom.  He beheld only the new and gorgeous prospect that war and
rapine were opening before him.  He thought only of the time that must
elapse ere his new efforts could be commenced--of the orders of the
people among whom he should successively make his voice heard--of the
temples which he should select for restoration--of the quarter of Rome
which should first be chosen for the reception of his daring reform.


At length he paused; his exhausted energies yielded under the exertions
imposed on them, and obliged him to bethink himself of refreshment and
repose.  It was now noon.  The course of his wanderings had insensibly
conducted him again to the precincts of his old, familiar
dwelling-place; he found himself at the back of the Pincian Mount, and
only separated by a strip of uneven woody ground, from the base of the
city wall.  The place was very solitary.  It was divided from the
streets and mansions above by thick groves and extensive gardens, which
stretched along the undulating descent of the hill.  A short distance
to the westward lay the Pincian Gate, but an abrupt turn in the wall
and some olive trees which grew near it, shut out all view of objects
in that direction.  On the other side, towards the eastward, the
ramparts were discernible, running in a straight line of some length,
until they suddenly turned inwards at a right angle and were concealed
from further observation by the walls of a distant palace and the pine
trees of a public garden.  The only living figure discernible near this
lonely spot, was that of a sentinel, who occasionally passed over the
ramparts above, which--situated as they were between two stations of
soldiery, one at the Pincian Gate and the other where the wall made the
angle already described--were untenanted, save by the guard within the
limits of whose watch they happened to be placed.  Here, for a short
space of time, the Pagan rested his weary frame, and aroused himself
insensibly from the enthralling meditations which had hitherto blinded
him to the troubled aspect of the world around him.

He now for the first time heard on all sides distinctly, the confused
noises which still rose from every quarter of Rome.  The same incessant
strife of struggling voices and hurrying footsteps, which had caught
his ear in the early morning, attracted his attention now; but no
shrieks of distress, no clash of weapons, no shouts of fury and
defiance, were mingled with them; although, as he perceived by the
position of the sun, the day had sufficiently advanced to have brought
the Gothic army long since to the foot of the walls.  What could be the
cause of this delay in the assault; of this ominous tranquillity on the
ramparts above him? Had the impetuosity of the Goths suddenly vanished
at the sight of Rome? Had negotiations for peace been organised with
the first appearance of the invaders?  He listened again.  No sounds
caught his ear differing in character from those he had just heard.
Though besieged, the city was evidently--from some mysterious
cause--not even threatened by an assault.

Suddenly there appeared from a little pathway near him, which led round
the base of the wall, a woman preceded by a child, who called to her
impatiently, as he ran on, 'Hasten, mother, hasten! There is no crowd
here.  Yonder is the Gate.  We shall have a noble view of the Goths!'

There was something in the address of the child to the woman that gave
Ulpius a suspicion, even then, of the discovery that flushed upon him
soon after.  He rose and followed them.  They passed onward by the
wall, through the olive trees beyond, and then gained the open space
before the Pincian Gate.  Here a great concourse of people had
assembled, and were suffered, in their proper turn, to ascend the
ramparts in divisions, by some soldiers who guarded the steps by which
they were approached.  After a short delay, Ulpius and those around him
were permitted to gratify their curiosity, as others had done before
them. They mounted the walls, and beheld, stretched over the ground
within and beyond the suburbs, the vast circumference of the Gothic
lines.

Terrible and almost sublime as was the prospect of that immense
multitude, seen under the brilliant illumination of the noontide sun,
it was not impressive enough to silence the turbulent loquacity rooted
in the dispositions of the people of Rome.  Men, women, and children,
all made their noisy and conflicting observations on the sight before
them, in every variety of tone, from the tremulous accents of terror,
to the loud vociferations of bravado.


Some spoke boastfully of the achievements that would be performed by
the Romans, when their expected auxiliaries arrived from Ravenna.
Others foreboded, in undissembled terror, an assault under cover of the
night. Here, a group abused, in low confidential tones, the policy of
the government in its relations with the Goths.  There, a company of
ragged vagabonds amused themselves by pompously confiding to each other
their positive conviction, that at that very moment the barbarians must
be trembling in their camp, at the mere sight of the all-powerful
Capital of the World.  In one direction, people were heard noisily
speculating whether the Goths would be driven from the walls by the
soldiers of Rome, or be honoured by an invitation to conclude a peace
with the august Empire, which they had so treasonably ventured to
invade. In another, the more sober and reputable among the spectators
audibly expressed their apprehensions of starvation, dishonour, and
defeat, should the authorities of the city be foolhardy enough to
venture a resistance to Alaric and his barbarian hosts.  But wide as
was the difference of the particular opinions hazarded among the
citizens, they all agreed in one unavoidable conviction, that Rome had
escaped the immediate horrors of an assault, to be threatened--if
unaided by the legions at Ravenna--by the prospective miseries of a
blockade.

Amid the confusion of voices around him, that word 'blockade' alone
reached the Pagan's ear.  It brought with it a flood of emotions that
overwhelmed him.  All that he saw, all that he heard, connected itself
imperceptibly with that expression.  A sudden darkness, neither to be
dissipated nor escaped, seemed to obscure his faculties in an instant.
He struggled mechanically through the crowd, descended the steps of the
ramparts, and returned to the solitary spot where he had first beheld
the woman and the child.

The city was blockaded!  The Goths were bent then, on obtaining a peace
and not on achieving a conquest!  The city was blockaded!  It was no
error of the ignorant multitude--he had seen with his own eyes the
tents and positions of the enemy, he had heard the soldiers on the wall
discoursing on the admirable disposition of Alaric's forces, on the
impossibility of obtaining the smallest communication with the
surrounding country, on the vigilant watch that had been set over the
navigation of the Tiber.  There was no doubt on the matter--the
barbarians had determined on a blockade!

There was even less uncertainty upon the results which would be
produced by this unimaginable policy of the Goths--the city would be
saved!  Rome had not scrupled in former years to purchase the
withdrawal of all enemies from her distant provinces; and now that the
very centre of her glory, the very pinnacle of her declining power, was
threatened with sudden and unexpected ruin, she would lavish on the
Goths the treasures of the whole empire, to bribe them to peace and to
tempt them to retreat.  The Senate might possibly delay the necessary
concessions, from hopes of assistance that would never be realised; but
sooner or later the hour of negotiation would arrive; northern rapacity
would be satisfied with southern wealth; and in the very moment when it
seemed inevitable, the ruin from which the Pagan revolution was to
derive its vigorous source, would be diverted from the churches of Rome.

Could the old renown of the Roman name have retained so much of its
ancient influence as to daunt the hardy Goths, after they had so
successfully penetrated the empire as to have reached the walls of its
vaunted capital?  Could Alaric have conceived so exaggerated an idea of
the strength of the forces in the city as to despair, with all his
multitudes, of storming it with success? It could not be otherwise!  No
other consideration could have induced the barbarian general to abandon
such an achievement as the destruction of Rome.  With the chance of an
assault the prospects of Paganism had brightened--with the certainty of
a blockade, they sunk immediately into disheartening gloom!


Filled with these thoughts, Ulpius paced backwards and forwards in his
solitary retreat, utterly abandoned by the exaltation of feeling which
had restored to his faculties in the morning, the long-lost vigour of
their former youth.  Once more, he experienced the infirmities of his
age; once more he remembered the miseries that had made his existence
one unending martyrdom; once more he felt the presence of his ambition
within him, like a judgment that he was doomed to welcome, like a curse
that he was created to cherish.  To say that his sensations at this
moment were those of the culprit who hears the order for his execution
when he had been assured of a reprieve, is to convey but a faint idea
of the fierce emotions of rage, grief, and despair, that now united to
rend the Pagan's heart.

Overpowered with weariness both of body and mind, he flung himself down
under the shade of some bushes that clothed the base of the wall above
him.  As he lay there--so still in his heavy lassitude that life itself
seemed to have left him--one of the long green lizards, common to
Italy, crawled over his shoulder.  He seized the animal--doubtful for
the moment whether it might not be of the poisonous species--and
examined it.  At the first glance he discovered that it was of the
harmless order of its race, and would have flung it carelessly from
him, but for something in its appearance which, in the wayward
irritability of his present mood, he felt a strange and sudden pleasure
in contemplating.

Through its exquisitely marked and transparent skin he could perceive
the action of the creature's heart, and saw that it was beating
violently, in the agony of fear caused to the animal by its
imprisonment in his hand.  As he looked on it, and thought how
continually a being so timid must be thwarted in its humble anxieties,
in its small efforts, in its little journeys from one patch of grass to
another, by a hundred obstacles, which, trifles though they might be to
animals of a higher species, were yet of fatal importance to creatures
constituted like itself, he began to find an imperfect, yet remarkable
analogy between his own destiny and that of this small unit of
creation.  He felt that, in its petty sphere, the short life of the
humble animal before him must have been the prey of crosses and
disappointments, as serious to it, as the more severed and destructive
afflictions of which he, in his existence, had been the victim; and, as
he watched the shadow-like movement of the little fluttering heart of
the lizard, he experienced a cruel pleasure in perceiving that there
were other beings in the creation, even down to the most insignificant,
who inherited a part of his misery, and suffered a portion of his
despair.

Ere long, however, his emotions took a sterner and a darker hue.  The
sight of the animal wearied him, and he flung it contemptuously aside.
It disappeared in the direction of the ramparts; and almost at the same
moment he heard a slight sound, resembling the falling of several
minute particles of brick or light stone, which seemed to come from the
wall behind him.

That such a noise should proceed from so massive a structure appeared
unaccountable.  He rose, and, parting the bushes before him, advanced
close to the surface of the lofty wall.  To his astonishment, he found
that the brickwork had in many places so completely mouldered away,
that he could move it easily with his fingers.  The cause of the
trifling noise that he had heard was now fully explained:  hundreds of
lizards had made their homes between the fissures of the bricks; the
animal that he had permitted to escape had taken refuge in one of these
cavities, and in the hurry of its flight had detached several of the
loose crumbling fragments that surrounded its hiding-place.

Not content, however, with the discovery he had already made, he
retired a little, and, looking stedfastly up through some trees which
in this particular place grew at the foot of the wall, he saw that its
surface was pierced in many places by great irregular rifts, some of
which extended nearly to its whole height.  In addition to this, he
perceived that the mass of the structure at one particular point,
leaned considerably out of the perpendicular.  Astounded at what he
beheld, he took a stick from the ground, and inserting it in one of the
lowest and smallest of the cracks, easily succeeded in forcing it
entirely into the wall, part of which seemed to be hollow, and part
composed of the same rotten brickwork which had at first attracted his
attention.


It was now evident that the whole structure, over a breadth of several
yards, had been either weakly and carelessly built, or had at some
former period suffered a sudden and violent shock. He left the stick in
the wall to mark the place; and was about to retire, when he heard the
footstep of the sentinel on the rampart immediately above.  Suddenly
cautious, though from what motive he would have been at that moment
hardly able to explain, he remained in the concealment of the trees and
bushes, until the guard had passed onward; then he cautiously emerged
from the place; and, retiring to some distance, fell into a train of
earnest and absorbing thought.

To account to the reader for the phenomenon which now engrossed the
Pagan's attention, it will be necessary to make a brief digression to
the history of the walls of Rome.

The circumference of the first fortifications of the city, built by
Romulus, was thirteen miles.  The greater part, however, of this large
area was occupied by fields and gardens, which it was the object of the
founder of the empire to preserve for arable purposes, from the
incursions of the different enemies by whom he was threatened from
without.  As Rome gradually increased in size, its walls were
progressively enlarged and altered by subsequent rulers.  But it was
not until the reign of the Emperor Aurelian (A.D. 270), that any
extraordinary or important change was effected in the defences of the
city.  That potentate commenced the erection of walls, twenty-one miles
in circumference, which were finally completed in the reign of Probus
(A.D. 276), were restored by Belisarius (A.D. 537), and are to be seen
in detached portions, in the fortifications of the modern city, to the
present day.

At the date of our story, then (A.D. 408), the walls remained precisely
as they had been constructed in the reigns of Aurelian and Probus.
They were for the most part made of brick; and in a few places,
probably, a sort of soft sandstone might have been added to the
pervading material. At several points in their circumference, and
particularly in the part behind the Pincian Hill, these walls were
built in arches, forming deep recesses, and occasionally disposed in
double rows.  The method of building employed in their erection, was
generally that mentioned by Vitruvius, in whose time it originated, as
'opus reticulatum'.

The 'opus reticulatum' was composed of small bricks (or stones) set
together on their angles, instead of horizontally, and giving the
surface of a wall the appearance of a sort of solid network. This was
considered by some architects of antiquity a perishable mode of
construction; and Vitruvius asserts that some buildings where he had
seen it used, had fallen down.  From the imperfect specimens of it
which remain in modern times, it would be difficult to decide upon its
merits. That it was assuredly insufficient to support the weight of the
bank of the Pincian Mount, which rose immediately behind it, in the
solitary spot described some pages back, is still made evident by the
appearance of the wall at that part of the city, which remains in
modern times bent out of the perpendicular, and cracked in some places
almost from top to bottom.  This ruin is now known to the present race
of Italians, under the expressive title of 'Il Muro Torto' or, The
Crooked Wall.

We may here observe that it is extremely improbable that the existence
of this natural breach in the fortifications of Rome was noticed, or if
noticed, regarded with the slightest anxiety or attention by the
majority of the careless and indolent inhabitants, at the period of the
present romance.  It is supposed to have been visible as early as the
time of Aurelian, but is only particularly mentioned by Procopius, an
historian of the sixth century, who relates that Belisarius, in
strengthening the city against a siege of the Goths, attempted to
repair this weak point in the wall, but was hindered in his intended
labour by the devout populace, who declared that it was under the
peculiar protection of St. Peter, and that it would be consequently
impious to meddle with it.  The general submitted without remonstrance
to the decision of the inhabitants, and found no cause afterwards to
repent of his facility of compliance; for, to use the translated words
of the writer above-mentioned, 'During the siege neither the enemy nor
the Romans regarded this place.'  It is to be supposed that so
extraordinary an event as this, gave the wall that sacred character,
which deterred subsequent rulers from attempting its repair; which
permitted it to remain crooked and rent through the convulsions of the
middle ages; and which still preserves it, to attest the veracity of
historians, by appealing to the antiquarian curiosity of the traveller
of modern times.


We now return to Ulpius.  It is a peculiarity observable in the
characters of men living under the ascendancy of one ruling idea, that
they intuitively distort whatever attracts their attention in the outer
world, into a connection more or less intimate with the single object
of their mental contemplation.  Since the time when he had been exiled
from the Temple, the Pagan's faculties had, unconsciously to himself,
acted solely in reference to the daring design which it was the
business of his whole existence to entertain.  Influenced, therefore,
by this obliquity of moral feeling, he had scarcely reflected on the
discovery that he had just made at the base of the city wall, ere his
mind instantly reverted to the ambitious meditations which had occupied
it in the morning; and the next moment, the first dawning conception of
a bold and perilous project began to absorb his restless thoughts.

He reflected on the peculiarities and position of the wall before him.
Although the widest and most important of the rents which he had
observed in it, existed too near the rampart to be reached without the
assistance of a ladder, there were others as low as the ground, which
he knew, by the result of the trial he had already made, might be
successfully and immensely widened by the most ordinary exertion and
perseverance.  The interior of the wall, if judged by the condition of
the surface, could offer no insuperable obstacles to an attempt at
penetration so partial as to be limited to a height and width of a few
feet.  The ramparts, from their position between two guard-houses,
would be unencumbered by an inquisitive populace.  The sentinel, within
the limits of whose allotted watch it happened to fall, would, when
night came on, be the only human being likely to pass the spot; and at
such an hour his attention must necessarily be fixed--in the
circumstances under which the city was now placed--on the prospect
beyond, rather than on the ground below and behind him.  It seemed,
therefore, almost a matter of certainty, that a cautious man, labouring
under cover of the night, might pursue whatever investigations he
pleased at the base of the wall.

He examined the ground where he now stood.  Nothing could be more
lonely than its present appearance.  The private gardens on the hill
above it shut out all communication from that quarter.  It could only
be approached by the foot-path that ran round the Pincian Mount, and
along the base of the walls.  In the state of affairs now existing in
the city, it was not probable that any one would seek this solitary
place, whence nothing could be seen, and where little could be heard,
in preference to mixing with the spirit-stirring confusion in the
streets, or observing the Gothic encampment from such positions on the
ramparts as were easily attainable to all.  In addition to the secresy
offered by the loneliness of this patch of ground to whatever
employments were undertaken on it, was the further advantage afforded
by the trees and thickets which covered its lower end, and which would
effectually screen an intruder, during the darkness of night, from the
most penetrating observation directed from the wall above.

Reflecting thus, he doubted not that a cunning and determined man might
with impunity so far widen any one of the inferior breaches in the
lower part of the wall as to make a cavity (large enough to admit a
human figure) that should pierce to its outer surface, and afford that
liberty of departing from the city and penetrating the Gothic camp
which the closed gates now denied to all the inhabitants alike.  To
discover the practicability of such an attempt as this was, to a mind
filled with such aspirations as the Pagan's, to determine irrevocably
on its immediate execution.  He resolved as soon as night approached to
begin his labours on the wall; to seek--if the breach were made good,
and the darkness favoured him--the tent of Alaric; and once arrived
there, to acquaint the Gothic King with the weakness of the materials
for defence within the city, and dilapidated condition of the
fortifications below the Pincian Mount, insisting, as the condition of
his treachery, on an assurance from the barbarian leader (which he
doubted not would be gladly and instantly accorded) of the destruction
of the Christian churches, the pillage of the Christian possessions,
and the massacre of the Christian priests.


He retired cautiously from the lonely place that had now become the
centre of his new hopes; and entering the streets of the city,
proceeded to provide himself with an instrument that would facilitate
his approaching labours, and food that would give him strength to
prosecute his intended efforts, unthreatened by the hindrance of
fatigue.  As he thought on the daring treachery of his project, his
morning's exultation began to return to him again.  All his previous
attempts to organise the restoration of Paganism sunk into sudden
insignificance before his present design. His defence of the Temple of
Serapis, his conspiracy at Alexandria, his intrigue with Vetranio, were
the efforts of a man; but this projected destruction of the priests,
the churches, and the treasures of a whole city, through the agency of
a mighty army, moved by the unaided machinations of a single
individual, would be the dazzling achievement of a god!

The hours loitered slowly onward.  The sun waned in the gorgeous
heaven, and set, surrounded by red and murky clouds.  Then came silence
and darkness.  The Gothic watch-fires flamed one by one into the dusky
air. The guards were doubled at the different posts.  The populace were
driven from the ramparts, and the fortifications of the great city
echoed to no sound now but the tramp of the restless sentinel, or the
clash of arms from the distant guard-houses that dotted the long line
of the lofty walls.

It was then that Ulpius, passing cautiously along the least-frequented
streets, gained unnoticed the place of his destination.  A thick vapour
lay over the lonely and marshy spot.  Nothing was now visible from it
but the dim, uncertain outline of the palaces above, and the mass, so
sunk in obscurity that it looked like a dark layer of mist itself, of
the rifted fortifications.  A smile of exultation passed over the
Pagan's countenance, as he perceived the shrouding and welcome
thickness of the atmosphere.  Groping his way softly through the
thickets, he arrived at the base of the wall.  For some time he passed
slowly along it, feeling the width of the different rents wherever he
could stretch his hand.  At length he paused at one more extensive than
the rest, drew from its concealment in his garments a thick bar of iron
sharpened at one end, and began to labour at the breach.

Chance had led him to the place best adapted to his purpose.  The
ground he stood on was only encumbered close to the wall by rank weeds
and low thickets, and was principally composed of damp, soft turf.  The
bricks, therefore, as he carefully detached them, made no greater noise
in falling than the slight rustling caused by their sudden contact with
the boughs through which they descended.  Insignificant as this sound
was, it aroused the apprehension of the wary Pagan.  He laid down his
iron bar, and removed the thickets by dragging them up, or breaking
them at the roots, until he had cleared a space of some feet in extent
before the base of the wall.  He then returned to his toilsome task,
and with hands bleeding from the wounds inflicted by the thorns he had
grasped in removing the thickets continued his labour at the
brick-work.  He pursued his employment with perfect impunity; the
darkness covered him from observation; no one disturbed him by
approaching the solitary scene of his operations; and of the two
sentinels who were placed near the part of the wall which was the
centre of all his exertions, one remained motionless at the most
distant extremity of his post, and the other paced restlessly backwards
and forwards on the rampart, singing a wild, rambling song about war,
and women, and wine, which, whatever liberty it might allow to his
organs of perception, effectually hindered the vigilant exercise of his
faculties of hearing.

Brick after brick yielded to the vigorous and well-timed efforts of
Ulpius.  He had already made a cavity, in an oblique direction, large
enough to creep through, and was preparing to penetrate still further,
when a portion of the rotten material of the interior of the wall
suddenly yielded in a mass to a chance pressure of his iron bar, and
slowly sunk down inwards into a bed which, judging by such faint sounds
as were audible at the moment, must have been partly water, and partly
marshy earth and rotten brick-work.  After having first listened, to be
sure that the slight noise caused by this event had not reached the
ears or excited the suspicions of the careless sentinels, Ulpius crept
into the cavity he had made, groping his way with his bar, until he
reached the brink of a chasm, the depth of which he could not probe,
and the breadth of which he could not ascertain.


He lingered irresolute; the darkness around him was impenetrable; he
could feel toads and noisome animals crawling over his limbs.  The damp
atmosphere of the place began to thrill through him to his very bones;
his whole frame trembled under the excess of his past exertions.
Without light, he could neither attempt to proceed, nor hope to
discover the size and extent of the chasm which he had partially laid
open.  The mist was fast vanishing as the night advanced: it was
necessary to arrive at a resolution ere it would be too late.

He crept out of the cavity.  Just as he had gained the open air, the
sentinel halted over the very spot where the Pagan stood, and paused
suddenly in his song.  There was an instant's interval of silence,
during which the inmost soul of Ulpius quailed beneath an apprehension
as vivid, as that which had throbbed in the heart of the despised
lizard, whose flight had guided him to his discovery at the wall.
Soon, however, he heard the voice of the soldier calling cheerfully to
his fellow sentinel, 'Comrade, do you see the moon?  She is rising to
cheer our watch!'

Nothing had been discovered!--he was still safe!  But if he stayed at
the cavity till the mists faded before the moonlight, could he be
certain of preserving his security?  He felt that he could not!

What mattered a night more or a night less, to such a project as his?
Months might elapse before the Goths retired from the walls.  It was
better to suffer delay than to risk discovery.  He determined to leave
the place, and to return on the following night provided with a
lantern, the light of which he would conceal until he entered the
cavity.  Once there, it could not be perceived by the sentinels
above--it would guide him through all obstacles, preserve him through
all dangers.  Massive as it was, he felt convinced that the interior of
the wall was in as ruinous a condition as the outside.  Caution and
perseverance were sufficient of themselves to insure to his efforts the
speediest and completest success.

He waited until the sentinel had again betaken himself to the furthest
limits of his watch, and then softly gathering up the brushwood that
lay round him, he concealed with it the mouth of the cavity in the
outer wall, and the fragments of brick-work that had fallen on the turf
beneath.  This done, he again listened, to assure himself that he had
been unobserved; then, stepping with the utmost caution, he departed by
the path that led round the slope of the Pincian Hill.

'Strength--patience--and to-morrow night!' muttered the Pagan to
himself, as he entered the streets, and congregated once more with the
citizens of Rome.



CHAPTER 11.

GOISVINTHA'S RETURN.

It was morning.  The sun had risen, but his beams were partially
obscured by thick heavy clouds, which scowled already over the
struggling brightness of the eastern horizon.  The bustle and animation
of the new day gradually overspread the Gothic encampment in all
directions.  The only tent whose curtain remained still closed, and
round which no busy crowds congregated in discussion or mingled in
labour, was that of Hermanric.  By the dying embers of his watchfire
stood the young chieftain, with two warriors, to whom he appeared to be
giving some hurried directions.  His countenance expressed emotions of
anxiety and discontent, which, though partially repressed while he was
in the presence of his companions, became thoroughly visible, not only
in his features, but in his manner, when they left him to watch alone
before his tent.


For some time he walked regularly backwards and forwards, looking
anxiously down the westward lines of the encampment, and occasionally
whispering to himself a hasty exclamation of doubt and impatience.
With the first breath of the new morning, the delighting meditations
which had occupied him by his watchfire during the darkness of the
night had begun to subside. And now, as the hour of her expected return
gradually approached, the image of Goisvintha banished from his mind
whatever remained of those peaceful and happy contemplation in which he
had hitherto been absorbed.  The more he thought on his fatal
promise--on the nation of Antonina--on his duties to the army and the
people to whom he belonged, the more doubtful appeared to him his
chance of permanently protecting the young Roman without risking his
degradation as a Goth, and his ruin as a warrior; and the more sternly
and ominously ran in his ears the unassailable truth of Goisvintha's
parting taunt--'You must remember your promise, you cannot save her if
you would!'

Wearied of persisting in deliberations which only deepened his
melancholy and increased his doubts; bent on sinking in a temporary and
delusive oblivion the boding reflections that overcame him in spite of
himself, by seeking--while its enjoyment was yet left to him--the
society of his ill-fated charge, he turned towards his tent, drew aside
the thick, heavy curtains of skins which closed its opening, and
approached the rude couch on which Antonina was still sleeping.

A ray of sunlight, fitful and struggling, burst at this moment through
the heavy clouds, and stole into the opening of the tent as he
contemplated the slumbering girl.  It ran its flowing course up her
uncovered hand and arm, flew over her bosom and neck, and bathed in a
bright fresh glow, her still and reposing features.  Gradually her
limbs began to move, her lips parted gently and half smiled, as if in
welcome to the greeting of the light; her eyes slightly opened, then
dazzled by the brightness that flowed through their raised lids,
tremblingly closed again.  At length thoroughly awakened, she shaded
her face with her hands, and sitting up on the couch, met the gaze of
Hermanric fixed on her in sorrowful examination.

'Your bright armour, and your glorious name, and your merciful words,
have remained with me even in my sleep,' said she, wonderingly; 'and
now, when I awake, I see you before me again!  It is a happiness to be
aroused by the sun which has gladdened me all my life, to look upon you
who have given me shelter in my distress!  But why,' she continued, in
altered and enquiring tones, 'why do you gaze upon me with doubting and
mournful eyes?'

'You have slept well and safely,' said Hermanric, evasively, 'I closed
the opening of the tent to preserve you from the night-damps, but I
have raised it now, for the air is warming under the rising sun--'

'Are you wearied with watching?' she interrupted, rising to her feet,
and looking anxiously into his face.  But he spoke not in reply.  His
head was turned towards the door of the tent.  He seemed to be
listening for some expected sound.  It was evident that he had not
heard her question.  She followed the direction of his eyes.  The sight
of the great city, half brightened, half darkened, as its myriad
buildings reflected the light of the sun, or retained the shadows of
the clouds, brought back to her remembrance her last night's petition
for her father's safety.  She laid her hand upon her companion's arm to
awaken his attention, and hastily resumed:--

'You have not forgotten what I said to you last night?  My father's
name is Numerian.  He lives on the Pincian Mount.  You will save him,
Hermanric--you will save him!  You will remember your promise!'

The young warrior's eyes fell as she spoke, and an irrepressible
shudder shook his whole frame. The last part of Antonina's address to
him, was expressed in the same terms as a past appeal from other lips,
and in other accents, which still clung to his memory.  The same
demand, 'Remember your promise,' which had been advanced to urge him to
bloodshed, by Goisvintha, was now proffered by Antonina, to lure him to
pity.  The petition of affection was concluded in the same terms as the
petition of revenge.  As he thought on both, the human pity of the one,
and the fiend-like cruelty of the other, rose in sinister and
significant contrast on the mind of the Goth, realising in all its
perils the struggle that was to come when Goisvintha returned, and
dispelling instantaneously the last hopes that he had yet ventured to
cherish for the fugitive at his side.

'No assault of the city is commanded--no assault is intended.  Your
father's life is safe from the swords of the Goths,' he gloomily
replied, in answer to Antonina's last words.

The girl moved back from him a few steps as he spoke, and looked
thoughtfully round the tent. The battle-axe that Hermanric had secured
during the scene of the past evening, still lay on the ground, in a
corner.  The sight of it brought back a flood of terrible recollections
to her mind.  She started violently; a sudden change overspread her
features, and when she again addressed Hermanric, it was with quivering
lips and in almost inarticulate words.

'I know now why you look on me so gloomily,' said she; 'that woman is
coming back!  I was so occupied by my dreams and my thoughts of my
father and of you, and my hopes for days to come, that I had forgotten
her when I awoke!  But I remember all now!  She is coming back--I  see
it in your sorrowful eyes--she is coming back to murder me!  I shall
die at the moment when I had such hope in my life!  There is no
happiness for me!  None!--none!'

The Goth's countenance began to darken.  He whispered to himself
several times, 'How can I save her?'  For a few minutes there was a
deep silence, broken only by the sobs of Antonina.  He looked round at
her after an interval.  She held her hands clasped over her eyes.  The
tears were streaming through her parted fingers; her bosom heaved as if
her emotions would burst their way through it in some palpable form;
and her limbs trembled so, that she could scarcely support herself.
Unconsciously, as he looked on her, he passed his arm round her slender
form, drew her hands gently from her face, and said to her, though his
heart belied his words as he spoke, 'Do not be afraid--trust in me!'

'How can I be calm?' she cried, looking up at him entreatingly; 'I was
so happy last night, so sure that you could preserve me, so hopeful
about to-morrow--and now I see by your mournful looks, I know by your
doubting voice, that to soothe my anguish you have promised me more
than you can perform!  The woman who is your companion, has a power
over us both, that it is terrible even to think of!  She will return,
she will withdraw all mercy from your heart, she will glare upon me
with her fearful eyes, she will kill me at your feet!  I shall die
after all I have suffered and all I have hoped!  Oh, Hermanric, while
there is yet time let us escape!  You were not made to shed blood--you
are too merciful!  God never made you to destroy!  You cannot yearn
towards cruelty and woe, for you have aided and protected me!  Let us
escape!  I will follow you wherever you wish!  I will do whatever you
ask!  I will go with you beyond those far, bright mountains behind us,
to any strange and distant land; for there is beauty everywhere; there
are woods that may be dwelt in, and valleys that may be loved, on all
the surface of this wide great earth!'

The Goth looked sadly on her as she paused; but he gave her no
answer--the gloom was deepening over his heart--the false words of
consolation were silenced on his lips.


'Think how many pleasures we should enjoy, how much we might see!'
continued the girl, in soft, appealing tones.  'We should be free to
wander wherever we pleased; we should never be lonely; never be
mournful; never be wearied!  I could listen to you day after day, while
you told me of the country where your people were born!  I could sing
you sweet songs that I have learned upon the lute!  Oh, how I have wept
in my loneliness to lead such a life as this!  How I have longed that
such freedom and joy might be mine!  How I have thought of the distant
lands that I would visit, of the happy nations that I would discover,
of the mountain breezes that I would breathe, of the shady places that
I would repose in, of the rivers that I would follow in their course,
of the flowers I would plant, and the fruits I would gather!  How I
have hoped for such an existence as this!  How I have longed for a
companion who might enjoy it as I should!  Have you never felt this joy
that I have imagined to myself, you who have been free to wander
wherever you pleased?  Let us leave this place, and I will teach it to
you if you have not.  I will be so patient, so obedient, so happy!  I
will never be sorrowful; never repining--but let us escape--Oh,
Hermanric, let us escape while there is yet time!  Will you keep me
here to be slain?  Can you drive me forth into the world alone?
Remember that the gates of the city and the doors of my home are now
closed to me! Remember that I have no mother, and that my father has
forsaken me!  Remember that I am a stranger on the earth which was made
for me to be joyful in!  Think how soon the woman who has vowed that
she will murder me will return; think how terrible it is to be in the
fear of death; and while there is time let us depart--Hermanric,
Hermanric, if you have pity for me, let us depart!'

She clasped her hands, and looked up in his face imploringly.  The
manner of Hermanric had expressed more to her senses, sharpened as they
were by peril, than his words could have conveyed, even had he
confessed to her the cause of the emotions of doubt and apprehension
that oppressed his mind.  Nothing could more strikingly testify to the
innocence of her character and the seclusion of her life, than her
attempt to combine with her escape from Goisvintha's fury, the
acquisition of such a companion as the Goth.  But to the forlorn and
affectionate girl who saw herself--a stranger to the laws of the social
existence of her fellow creatures--suddenly thrust forth friendless
into the unfriendly world, could the heart have naturally prompted any
other desire, than anxiety to secure the companion after having
discovered the protector?  In the guilelessness of her character, in
her absolute ignorance of humanity, of the influence of custom, of the
adaptation of difference of feeling to difference of sex, she vainly
imagined that the tranquil existence she had urged on Hermanric, would
suffice for the attainment of her end, by presenting the same
allurements to him, a warrior and a Goth, that it contained for her--a
lonely, thoughtful, visionary girl!  And yet, so wonderful was the
ascendancy that she had acquired by the magic of her presence, the
freshness of her beauty, and the novelty of her manner, over the heart
of the young chieftain, that he, who would have spurned from him with
contempt any other woman who might have addressed to him such a
petition as Antonina's, looked down sorrowfully at the girl as she
ceased speaking, and for an instant hesitated in his choice.

At that moment, when the attention of each was fixed on the other, a
third person stealthily approached the opening of the tent, and
beholding them together thus, burst into a bitter, taunting laugh.
Hermanric raised his eyes instantly; but the sound of that harsh
unwomanly voice was all-eloquent to Antonina's senses.  She hid her
face against the Goth's breast, and murmured breathlessly--'She has
returned! I must die!  I must die!'

She had returned!  She perceived Hermanric and Antonina in a position,
which left no doubt that a stronger feeling than the mere wish to
protect the victim of her intended revenge, had arisen, during her
absence, in the heart of her kinsman.  Hour after hour, while she had
fulfilled her duties by the beds of Alaric's invalided soldiery, had
she brooded over her projects of vengeance and blood.  Neither the
sickness nor the death which she had beheld around her, had possessed
an influence powerful enough over the stubborn ferocity which now alone
animated her nature, to lure it to mercy or awe it to repentance.
Invigorated by delay, and enlarged by disappointment, the evil passion
that consumed her had strengthened its power, and aroused the most
latent of its energies, during the silent vigil that she had just held.
She had detested the girl on the evening before, for her nation; she
now hated her for herself.

'What have you to do with the trappings of a Gothic warrior?' she
cried, in mocking accents, pointing at Hermanric with a long
hunting-knife which she held in her hand.  'Why are you here in a
Gothic encampment? Go, knock at the gates of Rome, implore her guards
on your knees to admit you among the citizens, and when they ask you
why--show them the girl there!  Tell them that you love her, that you
would wed her, that it is nothing to you that her people have murdered
your brother and his children!  And then, when you yourself have
begotten sons, Gothic bastards infected with Roman blood, be a Roman at
heart yourself, send your children forth to complete what your wife's
people left undone at Aquileia--by murdering me!'

She paused and laughed scornfully.  Then her humour suddenly changed,
she advanced a few steps, and continued in a louder and sterner tone:--


'You have broken your faith; you have lied to me; you have forgotten
your wrongs and mine; but you have not yet forgotten my parting words
when I left you last night!  I told you that she should be slain, and
now that you have refused to avenge me, I will make good my words by
killing her with my own hand!  If you would defend her, you must murder
me.  You must shed her blood or mine!'

She stepped forward, her towering form was stretched to its highest
stature, the muscles started into action on her bare arms as she raised
them above her head.  For one instant, she fixed her glaring eyes
steadily on the girl's shrinking form--the next, she rushed up and
struck furiously with the knife at her bare neck.  As the weapon
descended, Hermanric caught her wrist.  She struggled violently to
disengage herself from his grasp, but in vain.

The countenance of the young warrior grew deadly pale, as he held her.
For a few minutes he glanced eagerly round the tent, in an agony of
bewilderment and despair.  The conflicting interests of his duty
towards his sister, and his anxiety for Antonina's preservation, filled
his heart to distraction.  A moment more he hesitated, and during that
short delay, the despotism of custom had yet power enough to prevail
over the promptings of pity.  He called to the girl--withdrawing his
arm which had hitherto been her support,--'Go, have mercy on me, go!'

But she neither heeded nor heard him.  She fell on her knees at the
woman's feet, and in a low moaning voice faltered out:--

'What have I done that I deserve to be slain?  I never murdered your
children; I never yet saw a child but I loved it; if I had seen your
children, I should have loved them!'

'If I had preserved to this time the child that I saved from the
massacre, and you had approached him,' returned the woman fiercely, 'I
would have taught him to strike at you with his little hands! When you
spoke to him, he should have spat upon you for answer--even thus!'

Trembling, exhausted, terrified as she was, the girl's Roman blood
rushed over her pale cheeks as she felt the insult.  She turned towards
Hermanric, looked up at him appealingly, attempted to speak, and then
sinking lower upon the ground, wept bitterly.

'Why do you weep and pray and mouth it at him?' shrieked Goisvintha,
pointing to Hermanric with her disengaged hand.  'He has neither
courage to protect you, nor honour to aid me.  Do you think that I am
to be moved by your tears and entreaties?  I tell you that your people
have slain my husband and my children, and that I hate you for that.  I
tell you that you have lured Hermanric into love for a Roman and
unfaithfulness to me, and I will slay you for doing it!  I tell you
that there is not a living thing of the blood of your country, or the
name of your nation, throughout the length and breadth of this empire,
that I would not destroy if I had the power!  If the very trees on the
road hither could have had feeling, I would have torn the bark from
their stems with my own hands!  If a bird, native of your skies, had
flown into my bosom from very tameness and sport, I would have crushed
it dead at my feet!  And do you think that you shall escape?  Do you
think that I will not avenge the deaths of my husband and my children
upon you, after this?'

As she spoke, she mechanically unclenched her hands.  The knife dropped
to the ground.  Hermanric instantly stooped and secured it.  For a
moment she stood before him released from his grasp, motionless and
speechless.  Then, starting as if struck by a sudden idea, she moved
towards the opening of the tent, and, in tones of malignant triumph,
addressed him thus:--

'You shall not save her yet!  You are unworthy of your nation and your
name!  I will betray your cowardice and treachery to your brethren in
the camp!'  And she ran to the outside of the tent, calling in a loud
voice to a group of young warriors who happened to be passing at a
short distance.  'Stay, stay!
Fritigern--Athanaric--Colias--Suerid--Witheric--Fravitta!  Hasten
hitherward!  Hermanric has a captive in his tent--a prisoner whom it
will rejoice to see!  Hitherward!  hitherward!'


The group she addressed contained some of the most turbulent and
careless spirits of the whole Gothic army.  They had just been released
from their duties of the past night, and were at leisure to comply with
Goisvintha's request.  She had scarcely concluded her address before
they turned and hurried eagerly up to the tent, shouting to Hermanric,
as they advanced, to make his prisoner visible to them in the open air.

They had probably expected to be regaled by the ludicrous terror of
some Roman slave whom their comrade had discovered lurking in the empty
suburbs; for when they entered the tent, and saw nothing but the
shrinking figure of the unhappy girl, as she crouched on the earth at
Hermanric's feet, they all paused with one accord, and looked round on
each other in speechless astonishment.

'Behold her!' cried Goisvintha, breaking the momentary silence.  'She
is the Roman prisoner that your man of valour there has secured for
himself!  For that trembling child he has forgotten the enmities of his
people!  She is more to him already than army, general, or companions.
You have watched before the city during the night; but he has stood
sentinel by the maiden of Rome! Hope not that he will share in your
toils, or mix in your pleasures more.  Alaric and the warriors have
lost his services--his future king cringes there at his feet!'

She had expected to arouse the anger and excite the jealousy of the
rough audience she addressed; but the result of her envenomed jeers
disappointed her hopes.  The humour of the moment prompted the Goths to
ridicule, a course infinitely more inimical to Antonina's interests
with Hermanric than menaces or recrimination.  Recovered from their
first astonishment, they burst into a loud and universal laugh.

'Mars and Venus caught together!  But, by St.  Peter, I see not Vulcan
and the net!' cried Fravitta, who having served in the armies of Rome,
and acquired a vague knowledge there of the ancient mythology, and the
modern politics of the Empire, was considered by his companions as the
wit of the battalion to which he was attached.

'I like her figure,' growled Fritigern, a heavy, phlegmatic giant,
renowned for his imperturbable good humour and his prowess in drinking.
'What little there is of it looks so limp that Hermanric might pack her
into his light baggage and carry her about with him on his shoulders
wherever he goes!'

'By which process you would say, old sucker of wine-skins, that he will
attain the double advantage of always keeping her to himself, and
always keeping her warm,' interrupted Colias, a ruddy, reckless boy of
sixteen, privileged to be impertinent in consideration of his years.

'Is she Orthodox or Arian?' gravely demanded Athanaric, who piqued
himself on his theological accomplishments and his extraordinary piety.

'What hair she has!' exclaimed Suerid, sarcastically.  'It is as black
as the horse-hides of a squadron of Huns!'

'Show us her face!  Whose tent will she visit next?' cried Witheric,
with an insolent laugh.

'Mine!' replied Fritigern, complacently.  'What says the chorus of the
song?

'Money and wine Make beauty mine!

I have more of both than any of you.  She will come to my tent!'

During the delivery of these clumsy jests, which followed one upon
another with instantaneous rapidity, the scorn at first expressed in
Hermanric's countenance became gradually replaced by a look of
irrepressible anger.  As Fritigern spoke, he lost all command over
himself, and seizing his sword, advanced threateningly towards the
easy-tempered giant, who made no attempt to recede or defend himself,
but called out soothingly, 'Patience, man! patience!  Would you kill an
old comrade for jesting?  I envy you your good luck as a friend, not as
an enemy!'


Yielding to the necessity of lowering his sword before a defenceless
man, Hermanric was about to reply angrily to Fritigern, when his voice
was drowned in the blast of a trumpet, sounding close by the tent.  The
signal that it gave was understood at once by the group of jesters
still surrounding the young Goth.  They turned, and retired without an
instant's delay.  The last of their number had scarcely disappeared,
when the same veteran who had spoken with Hermanric, on the departure
of Goisvintha the evening before, entered and thus addressed him:--

'You are commanded to post yourself with the division that now awaits
you, at a place eastward of your present position, which will be shown
you by a guide.  Make ready at once--you have not an instant to delay.'

As the words passed the old man's lips, Hermanric turned and looked on
Goisvintha.  During the presence of the Goths in the tent, she had sat
listening to their rough jeers in suppressed wrath and speechless
disdain; now she rose and advanced a few steps.  But there suddenly
appeared an unwonted hesitation in her gait; her face was pale; she
breathed fast and heavily.  'Where will you shelter her now?' she
cried, addressing Hermanric, and threatening the girl with her
outstretched hands.  'Abandon her to your companions, or leave her to
me; she is lost either way!  I shall triumph--triumph!'--

At this moment her voice sank to an unintelligible murmur; she tottered
where she stood.  It was evident that the long strife of passions
during her past night of watching, and the fierce and varying emotions
of the morning, suddenly brought to a crisis, as they had been, by her
exultation when she heard the old warrior's fatal message, had at
length overtasked the energies even of her powerful frame.  Yet one
moment more she endeavoured to advance, to speak, to snatch the hunting
knife from Hermanric's hand; the next she fell insensible at his feet.

Goaded almost to madness by the successive trials that he had
undergone; Goisvintha's furious determination to thwart him, still
present to his mind; the scornful words of his companions yet ringing
in his ears; his inexorable duties demanding his attention without
reserve or delay; Hermanric succumbed at last under the difficulties of
his position, and despairingly abandoned all further hope of effecting
the girl's preservation.  Pointing to some food that lay in a corner of
the tent, and to the country behind, he said to her, in broken and
gloomy accents, 'Furnish yourself with those provisions, and fly, while
Goisvintha is yet unable to pursue you.  I can protect you no longer!'

Until this moment, Antonina had kept her face hidden, and had remained
still crouching on the ground; motionless, save when a shudder ran
through her frame as she listened to the loud, coarse jesting of the
Goths; and speechless, except that when Goisvintha sank senseless to
the earth, she uttered an exclamation of terror.  But now, when she
heard the sentence of her banishment proclaimed by the very lips which
but the evening before had assured her of shelter and protection, she
rose up instantly, cast on the young Goth a glance of such speechless
misery and despair, that he involuntarily quailed before it; and then,
without a tear or a sigh, without a look of reproach, or a word of
entreaty, petrified and bowed down beneath a perfect trance of terror
and grief, she left the tent.

Hurrying his actions with the reckless energy of a man determined on
banishing his thoughts by his employments, Hermanric placed himself at
the head of his troop, and marched quickly onwards in an eastward
direction past the Pincian Gate.  Two of his attendants who happened to
enter the tent after his departure, observing Goisvintha still extended
on the earth, proceeded to transport her to part of the camp occupied
by the women who were attached to the army; and then, the little
sheltering canopy which made the abode of the Goth, and which had
witnessed so large a share of human misery and so fierce a war of human
contention in so few hours, was left as silent and lonely as the
deserted country in which Antonina was now fated to seek a refuge and a
home.



CHAPTER 12.

THE PASSAGE OF THE WALL.

'A fair night this, Balbus!  All moonlight and no mist!  I was posted
last evening at the Ostian Gate, and was half choked by the fog.'

'If you were posted last night at the Ostian Gate, you were better
placed than you are now.  The ramparts here are as lonely as a ruin in
the provinces.  Nothing behind us but the back of the Pincian Mount;
nothing before us but the empty suburbs; nothing at each side of us but
brick and stone; nothing at our posts but ourselves.  May I be
crucified like St. Peter, if I believe that there is another place on
the whole round of the walls possessed of such solitary dulness as
this!'

'You are a man to find something to complain of, if you were lodged in
one of the palaces yonder.  The place is solitary enough, it is true;
but whether it is dull or not depends on ourselves, its most honourable
occupants.  I, for one, am determined to promote its joviality by the
very praiseworthy exertion of obliging you, my discontented friend,
with an inexhaustible series of those stories for which, I may say,
without arrogance, I am celebrated throughout the length and breadth of
all the barracks of Rome.'

'You may tell as many stories as you please, but do not imagine that I
will make one of your audience.'

'You are welcome to attend to me or not, as you choose.  Though you do
not listen, I shall still relate my stories by way of practice.  I will
address them to the walls, or to the air, or to the defunct gods and
goddesses of antiquity, should they happen at this moment to be
hovering over the city in a rage, as some of the unconverted would have
us believe; or to our neighbours the Goths, if they are seized with a
sudden desire to quite their encampments, and obtain a near view of the
fortifications that they are so discreetly unwilling to assault.  Or,
these materials for a fit and decent auditory failing me, I will tell
my stories to the most attentive of all listeners--myself.'

And the sentinel, without further delay, opened his budget of
anecdotes, with the easy fluency of of a man who possessed a
well-placed confidence in the perfection of his capacities for
narration. Determined that his saturnine colleague should hear him,
though he would not give him his attention, he talked in a raised
voice, pacing briskly backwards and forwards over the space of his
allotted limits, and laughing with ludicrous regularity and complacency
at every jest that he happened to make in the course of his
ill-rewarded narrative.  He little thought, as he continued to proceed
in his tale that its commencement had been welcomed by an unseen
hearer, with emotions widely different from those which had dictated
the observations of the unfriendly companion of his watch.

True to his determination, Ulpius, with part of the wages which he had
hoarded in Numerian's service, had procured a small lantern from a shop
in one of the distant quarters of Rome; and veiling its light in a
piece of coarse, thick cloth, had proceeded by the solitary pathway to
his second night's labour at the wall.  He arrived at the breach, at
the commencement of the dialogue above related, and heard with delight
the sentinel's noisy resolution to amuse his companion in spite of
himself. The louder and the longer the man talked, the less probable
was the chance that the Pagan's labours in the interior of the wall
would be suspected or overheard.

Softly clearing away the brushwood at the entrance of the hole that he
had made the night before, Ulpius crept in as far as he had penetrated
on that occasion; and then, with mingled emotions of expectation and
apprehension which affected him so powerfully, that he was for the
moment hardly master of his actions, he slowly and cautiously uncovered
his light.


His first glance was intuitively directed to the cavity that opened
beneath him.  He saw immediately that it was less important, both in
size and depth, than he had imagined it to be.  The earth at this
particular place had given way beneath the foundations of the wall,
which had sunk down, deepening the chasm by their weight, into the
yielding ground beneath them.  A small spring of water (probably the
first cause of the sinking in the earth) had bubbled up into the space
in the brick-work, which bit by bit, and year by year, it had gradually
undermined.  Nor did it remain stagnant at this place.  It trickled
merrily and quietly onward--a tiny rivulet, emancipated from one prison
in the ground only to enter another in the wall, bounded by no grassy
banks, brightened by no cheerful light, admired by no human eye,
followed in its small course through the inner fissures in the brick by
no living thing but a bloated toad, or a solitary lizard:  yet wending
as happily on its way through darkness and ruin, as its sisters who
were basking in the sunlight of the meadows, or leaping in the fresh
breezes of the open mountain side.

Raising his eyes from the little spring, Ulpius next directed his
attention to the prospect above him.

Immediately over his head, the material of the interior of the wall
presented a smooth, flat, hard surface, which seemed capable of
resisting the most vigorous attempts at its destruction; but on looking
round, he perceived at one side of him and further inwards, an
appearance of dark, dimly-defined irregularity, which promised
encouragingly for his intended efforts.  He descended into the chasm of
the rivulet, crawled up on a heap of crumbling brick-work, and gained a
hole above it, which he immediately began to widen, to admit of his
passage through.  Inch by inch, he enlarged the rift, crept into it,
and found himself on a fragment of the bow of one of the foundation
arches, which, though partly destroyed, still supported itself,
isolated from all connection with the part of the upper wall which it
had once sustained, and which had gradually crumbled away into the
cavities below.

He looked up.  An immense rift soared above him, stretching its
tortuous ramifications, at different points, into every part of the
wall that was immediately visible.  The whole structure seemed, at this
place, to have received a sudden and tremendous wrench.  But for the
support of the sounder fortifications at each side of it, it could not
have sustained itself after the shock. The Pagan gazed aloft, into the
fearful breaches which yawned above him, with ungovernable awe.  His
small, fitful light was not sufficient to show him any of their
terminations.  They looked, as he beheld them in dark relief against
the rest of the hollow part of the wall, like mighty serpents twining
their desolating path right upward to the ramparts above; and he,
himself, as he crouched on his pinnacle with his little light by his
side, was reduced by the wild grandeur, the vast, solemn gloom of the
obscure, dusky, and fantastic objects around him, to the stature of a
pigmy.  Could he have been seen from the ramparts high overhead, as he
now peered down behind his lantern into the cavities and irregularities
below him, he would have looked, with his flickering light, like a mole
led by a glow-worm.

He paused to consider his next movements.  In a stationary position,
the damp coldness of the atmosphere was almost insupportable, but he
attained a great advantage by his present stillness: he could listen
undisturbed by the noises made by the bricks which crumbled from under
him, if he advanced.


Ere long, he heard a thin, winding, long-drawn sound, now louder, now
softer; now approaching, now retreating; now verging towards
shrillness, now quickly returning to a faint, gentle swell.  Suddenly
this strange unearthly music was interrupted by a succession of long,
deep, rolling sounds, which travelled grandly about the fissures above,
like prisoned thunderbolts striving to escape.  Utterly ignorant that
the first of these noises was occasioned by the night wind winding
through the rents in the brick of the outer wall beyond him; and the
second, by the echoes produced in the irregular cavities above, by the
footfall of the sentries overhead--roused by the influence of the
place, and the mystery of his employment, to a pitch of fanatic
exaltation, which for the moment absolutely unsteadied his
reason--filled with the frantic enthusiasm of his designs, and the
fearful legends of invisible beings and worlds which made the
foundation of his worship, Ulpius conceived, as he listened to the
sounds around and above, that the gods of antiquity were now in
viewless congregation hovering about him, and calling to him in
unearthly voices and in an unknown tongue, to proceed upon his daring
enterprise, in the full assurance of its near and glorious success.

'Roar and mutter, and make your hurricane music in my ears!' exclaimed
the Pagan, raising his withered hands, and addressing in a savage
ecstacy his imagined deities.  'Your servant Ulpius stops not on the
journey that leads him to your repeopled shrines!  Blood, crime,
danger, pain--pride and honour, joy and rest, have I strewn like
sacrifices at your altars' feet!  Time has whirled past me; youth and
manhood have lain long since buried in the hidden Lethe which is the
portion of life; age has wreathed his coils over my body's strength,
but still I watch by your temples and serve your mighty cause!  Your
vengeance is near! Monarchs of the world, your triumph is at hand!'

He remained for some time in the same position, looking fixedly up into
the trackless darkness above him, drinking in the sounds
which--alternately rising and sinking--still floated round him. The
trembling gleam of his lantern fell red and wild upon his livid
countenance.  His shaggy hair floated in the cold breezes that blew by
him.  At this moment he would have appeared from a distance, like a
phantom of fire perishing in a mist of darkness; like a Gnome in
adoration in the bowels of the earth; like a forsaken spirit in a
solitary purgatory, watching for the advent of a glimpse of beauty, or
a breath of air.

At length he aroused himself from his trance, trimmed with careful hand
his guiding lantern, and set forward to penetrate the breadth of the
great rift he had just entered.

He moved on in an oblique direction several feet, now creeping over the
tops of the foundation arches, now skirting the extremities of
protrusions in the ruined brick-work, now descending into dark slimy
rubbish-choked chasms, until the rift suddenly diminished in all
directions.

The atmosphere was warmer in the place he now occupied; he could
faintly distinguish patches of dark moss, dotted here and there over
the uneven surface of the wall; and once or twice, some blades of long
flat grass, that grew from a prominence immediately above his head,
were waved in his face by the wind, which he could now feel blowing
through the narrow fissure that he was preparing to enlarge.  It was
evident that he had by this time advanced to within a few feet of the
outer extremity of the wall.

'Numerian wanders after his child through the streets,' muttered the
Pagan, as he deposited his lantern by his side, bared his trembling
arms, and raised his iron bar, 'the slaves of his neighbour the senator
are forth to pursue me.  On all sides my enemies are out after me; but,
posted here, I mock their strictest search!  If they would track me to
my hiding-place, they must penetrate the walls of Rome!  If they would
hunt me down in my lair, they must assail me to-night in the camp of
the Goths!  Fools! let them look to themselves!  I seal the doom of
their city, with the last brick that I tear from their defenceless
walls!'

He laughed to himself as he thrust his bar boldly into the crevice
before him.  In some places the bricks yielded easily to his efforts;
in others, their resistance was only to be overcome by the exertion of
his utmost strength.  Resolutely and unceasingly he continued his
labours; now wounding his hands against the jagged surfaces presented
by the widening fissure; now involuntarily dropping his instrument from
ungovernable exhaustion; but, still working bravely on, in defiance of
every hindrance that opposed him, until he gained the interior of the
new rift.

As he drew his lantern after him into the cavity that he had made, he
perceived that, unless it was heightened immediately over him, he could
proceed no further, even in a creeping position. Irritated at this
unexpected necessity for more violent exertion, desperate in his
determination to get through the wall at all hazards on that very
night, he recklessly struck his bar upwards with all his strength,
instead of gradually and softly loosening the material of the surface
that opposed him, as he had done before.

A few moments of this labour had scarcely elapsed, when a considerable
portion of the brick-work, consolidated into one firm mass, fell with
lightning suddenness from above.  It hurled him under it, prostrate on
the foundation arch which had been his support; crushed and dislocated
his right shoulder; and shivered his lantern into fragments.  A groan
of irrepressible anguish burst from his lips.  He was left in
impenetrable darkness.

The mass of brick-work, after it had struck him, rolled a little to one
side.  By a desperate exertion he extricated himself from under
it--only to swoon from the fresh anguish caused to him by the effort.

For a short time he lay insensible in his cold dark solitude.  Then,
reviving after this first shock, he began to experience in all their
severity, the fierce spasms, the dull gnawings, the throbbing torments,
that were the miserable consequences of the injury he received.  His
arm lay motionless by his side--he had neither strength nor resolution
to move any one of the other sound limbs in his body.  At one moment
his deep, sobbing, stifled respirations, syllabled horrible and
half-formed curses--at another, his panting breaths suddenly died away
within him; and then he could hear the blood dripping slowly from his
shoulder, with dismal regularity, into a little pool that it had formed
already by his side.

The shrill breezes which wound through the crevices in the wall before
him, were now felt only on his wounded limb.  They touched its surface
like innumerable splinters of thin, sharp ice; they penetrated his
flesh like rushing sparks struck out of a sea of molten lead.  There
were moments, during the first pangs of this agony, when if he had been
possessed of a weapon and of the strength to use it, he would have
sacrificed his ambition for ever by depriving himself of life.

But this desire to end his torments with his existence lasted not long.
Gradually, the anguish in his body awakened a wilder and stronger
distemper in his mind, and then the two agonies, physical and mental,
rioted over him together in fierce rivalry, divesting him of all
thoughts but such as were by their own agency created or aroused.

For some time he lay helpless in his misery, alternately venting by
stifled groans the unalleviated torment of his wounds, and lamenting
with curses the failure of his enterprise, at the very moment of its
apparent success.  At length, the pangs that struck through him seemed
to grow gradually less frequent; he hardly knew now from what part of
his frame they more immediately proceeded. Insensibly, his faculties of
thinking and feeling grew blunted; then he remained a little while in a
mysterious unrefreshing repose of body and mind; and then his
disordered senses, left unguided and unrestrained, became the victims
of a sudden and terrible delusion.

The blank darkness around him appeared, after an interval, to be
gradually dawning into a dull light, thick and misty, like the
reflections on clouds which threaten a thunderstorm at the close of
evening.  Soon, this atmosphere seemed to be crossed and streaked with
a fantastic trellis-work of white, seething vapour.  Then the mass of
brick-work which had struck him down, grew visible at his side,
enlarged to an enormous bulk, and endued with a power of self-motion,
by which it mysteriously swelled and shrank, and raised and depressed
itself, without quitting for a moment its position near him.  And then,
from its dark and toiling surface there rose a long stream of dusky
shapes, which twined themselves about the misty trellis-work above, and
took the prominent and palpable form of human countenances, marked by
every difference of age and distorted by every variety of suffering.


There were infantine faces, wreathed about with grave-worms that hung
round them like locks of filthy hair; aged faces, dabbled with gore and
slashed with wounds; youthful faces, seamed with livid channels, along
which ran unceasing tears; lovely faces, distorted into fixed
expressions of raging pain, wild malignity, and despairing gloom.  Not
one of these countenances exactly resembled the other.  Each was
distinguished by a revolting character of its own.  Yet, however
deformed might be their other features, the eyes of all were preserved
unimpaired.  Speechless and bodiless, they floated in unceasing myriads
up to the fantastic trellis-work, which seemed to swell its wild
proportions to receive them.  There they clustered, in their goblin
amphitheatre, and fixed and silently they all glared down, without one
exception, on the Pagan's face!

Meanwhile, the walls at the side began to gleam out with a light of
their own, making jagged boundaries to the midway scene of phantom
faces.  Then the rifts in their surfaces widened, and disgorged
misshapen figures of priests and idols of the old time, which came
forth in every hideous deformity of aspect, mocking at the faces on the
trellis-work; while behind and over the whole, soared shapes of
gigantic darkness, robed in grim cloudy resemblances of skins such as
were worn by the Goths, and wielding through the quivering vapour,
mighty and shadow-like weapons of war.  From the whole of this ghastly
assemblage there rose not the slightest sound. A stillness, as of a
dead and ruined world, possessed in all its quarters the appalling
scene.  The deep echoes of the sentries' footsteps and the faint
dirging of the melancholy winds were no more.  The blood that had as
yet dripped from his wound, made no sound now in the Pagan's ear; even
his own agony of terror was as silent as were the visionary demons who
had aroused it. Days, years, centuries, seemed to pass, as he lay
gazing up, in a trance of horror, into his realm of peopled and ghostly
darkness.  At last nature yielded under the trial; the phantom prospect
suddenly whirled round him with fearful velocity, and his senses sought
refuge from the thraldom of their own creation in a deep and welcome
swoon.

Time had moved wearily onward, the chiding winds had many times waved
the dry locks of his hair to and fro about his brow, as if to bid him
awaken and arise, ere he again recovered his consciousness.  Once more
aroused to the knowledge of his position and the sensation of his
wound, he slowly raised himself upon his uninjured arm, and looked
wildly around for the faintest appearance of a gleam of light.  But the
winding and uneven nature of the track which he had formed to lead him
through the wall, effectually prevented the moonbeams, then floating
into the outermost of the cavities that he had made, from reaching the
place where he now lay. Not a single object was even faintly
distinguishable around him.  Darkness hemmed him in, in rayless and
triumphant obscurity, on every side.

The first agonies of the injury he had received had resolved themselves
into one dull, heavy, unchanging sensation of pain.  The vision that
had overwhelmed his senses was now, in a vast and shadowy form, present
only to his memory, filling the darkness with fearful recollections,
and not with dismal forms; and urging on him a restless, headlong
yearning to effect his escape from the lonely and unhallowed sepulchre,
the prison of solitude and death, that his own fatal exertions
threatened him with, should he linger much longer in the caverns of the
wall.

'I must pass from this darkness into light--I must breathe the air of
the sky, or I shall perish in the damps of this vault,' he exclaimed in
a hoarse, moaning voice, as he raised himself gradually and painfully
into a creeping position; and turning round slowly, commenced his
meditated retreat.

His brain still whirled with the emotions that had so lately
overwhelmed his mind; his right hand hung helplessly by his side,
dragged after him like a prisoner's chain, and lacerated by the uneven
surface of the ground over which it was slowly drawn, as--supporting
himself on his left arm, and creeping forward a few inches at a
time--he set forth on his toilsome journey.

Here, he paused bewildered in the darkness; there, he either checked
himself by a convulsive effort from falling headlong into the unknown
deeps beneath him, or lost the little ground he had gained in labour
and agony, by retracing his way at the bidding of some unexpected
obstacle. Now he gnashed his teeth in anguish, now he cursed in
despair, now he was breathless with exhaustion; but still, with an
obstinacy that had in it something of the heroic, he never failed in
his fierce resolution to effect his escape.


Slowly and painfully, moving with the pace and the perseverance of the
tortoise, hopeless yet determined as a navigator in a strange sea, he
writhed onward and onward upon his unguided course, until he reaped at
length the reward of his long suffering, by the sudden discovery of a
thin ray of moonlight toiling through a crevice in the murky brickwork
before him.  Hardly did the hearts of the Magi when the vision of 'the
star in the East' first dawned on their eyes, leap within them with a
more vivid transport, than that which animated the heart of Ulpius at
the moment when he beheld the inspiring and guiding light.

Yet a little more exertion, a little more patience, a little more
anguish; and he stood once again, a ghastly and crippled figure, before
the outer cavity in the wall.

It was near daybreak; the moon shone faintly in the dull, grey heaven;
a small, vaporous rain was sinking from the shapeless clouds; the
waning night showed bleak and cheerless to the earth, but cast no
mournful or reproving influence over the Pagan's mind.  He looked round
on his solitary lurking place, and beheld no human figure in its lonely
recesses.  He looked up at the ramparts, and saw that the sentinels
stood silent and apart, wrapped in their heavy watch-cloaks, and
supported on their trusty weapons.  It was perfectly apparent that the
events of his night of suffering and despair had passed unheeded by the
outer world.

He glanced back with a shudder upon his wounded and helpless limb; then
his eyes fixed themselves upon the wall.  After surveying it with an
earnest and defiant gaze, he slowly moved the brushwood with his foot,
against the small cavity in its outer surface.

'Days pass, wounds heal, chances change,' muttered the old man,
departing from his haunt with slow and uncertain steps.  'In the mines
I have borne lashes without a murmur--I have felt my chains widening,
with each succeeding day, the ulcers that their teeth of iron first
gnawed in my flesh, and have yet lived to loosen my fetters, and to
close my sores!  Shall this new agony have a power to conquer me
greater than the others that are past?  I will even yet return in time
to overcome the resistance of the wall!  My arm is crushed, but my
purpose is whole!'



CHAPTER 13.

THE HOUSE IN THE SUBURBS.

Retracing some hours, we turn from the rifted wall to the suburbs and
the country which its ramparts overlook; abandoning the footsteps of
the maimed and darkly-plotting Ulpius, our attention now fixes itself
on the fortunes of Hermanric, and the fate of Antonina.

Although the evening had as yet scarcely closed, the Goth had allotted
to the warriors under his command their different stations for the
night in the lonely suburbs of the city.  This duty performed, he was
left to the unbroken solitude of the deserted tenement which now served
him as a temporary abode.

The house he occupied was the last of the wide and irregular street in
which it stood; it looked towards the wall beneath the Pincian Mount,
from which it was separated by a public garden about half a mile in
extent.  This once well-thronged place of recreation was now totally
unoccupied.  Its dull groves were brightened by no human forms; the
chambers of its gay summer houses were dark and desolate; the booths of
its fruit and flower-sellers stood vacant on its untrodden lawns.
Melancholy and forsaken, it stretched forth as a fertile solitude under
the very walls of a crowded city.


And yet there was a charm inexpressibly solemn and soothing in the
prospect of loneliness that it presented, as its flower-beds and trees
were now gradually obscured to the eye in the shadows of the advancing
night.  It gained in its present refinement as much as it had lost of
its former gaiety; it had its own simple attraction still, though it
failed to sparkle to the eye with its accustomed illuminations, or to
please the ear by the music and laughter, which rose from it in times
of peace.  As he looked forth over the view from the terrace of his new
abode, the remembrance of the employments of his past and busy hours
deserted the memory of the young Goth, leaving his faculties free to
welcome the reflections which night began insensibly to awaken and
create.

Employed under such auspices, whither would the thoughts of Hermanric
naturally stray?

From the moonlight that already began to ripple over the topmost
trembling leaves of the trees beyond him, to the delicate and shadowy
flowers that twined up the pillars of the deserted terrace where he now
stood, every object he beheld connected itself, to his vivid and
uncultured imagination, with the one being of whom all that was
beautiful in nature, seemed to him the eloquent and befitting type.  He
thought of Antonina whom he had once protected; of Antonina whom he had
afterwards abandoned; of Antonina whom he had now lost!

Strong in the imaginative and weak in the reasoning faculties; gifted
with large moral perception and little moral firmness; too easy to be
influenced and too difficult to be resolved, Hermanric had deserted the
girl's interests from an infirmity of disposition, rather than from a
determination of will.  Now, therefore, when the employments of the day
had ceased to absorb his attention; now when silence and solitude led
his memory back to his morning's abandonment of his helpless charge,
that act of fatal impatience and irresolution inspired him with the
strongest emotions of sorrow and remorse.  If during her sojourn under
his care, Antonina had insensibly influenced his heart, her image, now
that he reflected on his guilty share in their parting scene, filled
all his thoughts, at once saddening and shaming him, as he remembered
her banishment from the shelter of his tent.

Every feeling which had animated his reflections on Antonina on the
previous night, was doubled in intensity as he thought on her now.
Again he recalled her eloquent words, and remembered the charm of her
gentle and innocent manner; again he dwelt on the beauties of her
outward form.  Each warm expression; each varying intonation of voice
that had accompanied her petition to him for safety and companionship;
every persuasion that she had used to melt him, now revived in his
memory and moved in his heart with steady influence and increasing
power.  All the hurried and imperfect pictures of happiness which she
had drawn to allure him, now expanded and brightened, until his mind
began to figure to him visions that had been hitherto unknown to
faculties occupied by no other images than those of rivalry,
turbulence, and strife.  Scenes called into being by Antonina's
lightest and hastiest expressions, now rose vague and shadowy before
his brooding spirit.  Lovely places of earth that he had visited and
forgotten now returned to his recollection, idealised and refined as he
thought of her.  She appeared to his mind in every allurement of
action, fulfilling all the duties and enjoying all the pleasures that
she had proposed to him.  He imagined her happy and healthful,
journeying gaily by his side in the fresh morning, with rosy cheek and
elastic step; he imagined her delighting him by her promised songs,
enlivening him by her eloquent words, in the mellow stillness of
evening; he imagined her sleeping, soft and warm and still, in his
protecting arms--ever happy and ever gentle; girl in years, and woman
in capacities; at once lover and companion, teacher and pupil, follower
and guide!

Such she might have been once!  What was she now?


Was she sinking under her loneliness, perishing from exposure and
fatigue, repulsed by the cruel, or mocked by the unthinking?  To all
these perils and miseries had he exposed her; and to what end?  To
maintain the uncertain favour, to preserve the unwelcome friendship, of
a woman abandoned even by the most common and intuitive virtues of her
sex; whose frantic craving for revenge, confounded justice with
treachery, innocence with guilt, helplessness with tyranny; whose
claims of nation and relationship should have been forfeited in his
estimation, by the openly-confessed malignity of her designs, at the
fatal moment when she had communicated them to him in all their
atrocity, before the walls of Rome.  He groaned in despair, as he
thought on this, the most unworthy of the necessities, to which the
forsaken girl had been sacrificed.

Soon, however, his mind reverted from such reflections as these, to his
own duties and his own renown; and here his remorse became partially
lightened, though his sorrow remained unchanged.

Wonderful as had been the influence of Antonina's presence and
Antonina's words over the Goth, they had not yet acquired power enough
to smother in him entirely the warlike instincts of his sex and nation,
or to vanquish the strong and hostile promptings of education and
custom.  She had gifted him with new emotions, and awakened him to new
thought; she had aroused all the dormant gentleness of his disposition
to war against the rugged indifference, the reckless energy, that
teaching and example had hitherto made a second nature to his heart.
She had wound her way into his mind, brightening its dark places,
enlarging its narrow recesses, beautifying its unpolished treasures.
She had created, she had refined, during her short hours of
communication with him, but she had not lured his disposition entirely
from its old habits and its old attachments; she had not yet stripped
off the false glitter from barbarian strife, or the pomp from martial
renown; she had not elevated the inferior intellectual, to the height
of the superior moral faculties, in his inward composition.  Submitted
almost impartially to the alternate and conflicting dominion of the two
masters, Love and Duty, he at once regretted Antonina, and yet clung
mechanically to his old obedience to those tyrannic requirements of
nation and name, which had occasioned her loss.

Oppressed by his varying emotions, destitute alike of consolation and
advice, the very inaction of his present position sensibly depressed
him.  He rose impatiently, and buckling on his weapons, sought to
escape from his thoughts, by abandoning the scene under the influence
of which they had been first aroused.  Turning his back upon the city,
he directed his steps at random, through the complicated labyrinth of
streets, composing the extent of the deserted suburbs.

After he had passed through the dwellings comprised in the occupation
of the Gothic lines, and had gained those situated nearer to the
desolate country beyond, the scene around him became impressive enough
to have absorbed the attention of any man not wholly occupied by other
and more important objects of contemplation.

The loneliness he now beheld on all sides, was not the loneliness of
ruin--the buildings near him were in perfect repair; it was not the
loneliness of pestilence--there were no corpses strewn over the
untrodden pavements of the streets; it was not the loneliness of
seclusion--there were no barred windows, and few closed doors; it was a
solitude of human annihilation.  The open halls were unapproached; the
benches before the wine-shops were unoccupied; remains of gaudy
household wares still stood on the counters of the street booths,
watched by none, bought by none; particles of bread and meat
(treasures, fated to become soon of greater value than silver and gold,
to beleaguered Rome) rotted here in the open air, like garbage upon
dunghills; children's toys, women's ornaments, purses, money,
love-tokens, precious manuscripts, lay scattered hither and thither in
the public ways, dropped and abandoned by their different owners, in
the hurry of their sudden and universal flight.  Every deserted street
was eloquent of darling projects desperately resigned, of valued
labours miserably deserted, of delighting enjoyments irretrievably
lost.  The place was forsaken even by those household gods of rich and
poor, its domestic animals.  They had either followed their owners into
the city, or strayed, unhindered and unwatched, into the country
beyond.  Mansion, bath, and circus, displayed their gaudy pomp and
luxurious comfort in vain; not even a wandering Goth was to be seen
near their empty halls. For, with such a prospect before them as the
subjugation of Rome, the army had caught the infection of its leader's
enthusiasm for his exalted task, and willingly obeyed his commands for
suspending the pillage of the suburbs, disdaining the comparatively
worthless treasures around them, attainable at any time, when they felt
that the rich coffers of Rome herself were now fast opening to their
eager hands.  Voiceless and noiseless, unpeopled and unravaged, lay the
far-famed suburbs of the greatest city of the universe, sunk alike in
the night of Nature, the night of Fortune, and the night of Glory!

Saddening and impressive as was the prospect thus presented to the eyes
of the young Goth, it failed to weaken the powerful influence that his
evening's meditations yet held over his mind.  As, during the hours
that were passed, the image of the forsaken girl had dissipated the
remembrance of the duties he had performed, and opposed the
contemplation of the commands he was yet to fulfil, so it now denied to
his faculties any impressions from the lonely scene, beheld, yet
unnoticed, which spread around him.  Still, as he passed through the
gloomy streets, his vain regrets and self-accusations, his natural
predilections and acquired attachments, ruled over him and contended
within him, as sternly and as unceasingly as in the first moments when
they had arisen with the evening, during his sojourn in the terrace of
the deserted house.

He had now arrived at the extremest boundary of the buildings in the
suburbs.  Before him lay an uninterrupted prospect of smooth, shining
fields, and soft, hazy, indefinable woods.  At one side of him were
some vineyards and cottage gardens; at the other was a solitary house,
the outermost of all the abodes in his immediate vicinity.  Dark and
cheerless as it was, he regarded it for some time with the mechanical
attention of a man more occupied in thought than
observation,--gradually advancing towards it in the moody abstraction
of his reflections, until he unconsciously paused before the low range
of irregular steps which led to its entrance door.

Startled from its meditations by his sudden propinquity to the object
that he had unwittingly approached, he now, for the first time,
examined the lonely abode before him with real attention.

There was nothing remarkable about the house, save the extreme
desolateness of its appearance, which seemed to arise partly from its
isolated position, and partly from the unusual absence of all
decoration on its external front.  It was too extensive to have been
the dwelling of a poor man, too void of pomp and ornament to have been
a mansion of the rich.  It might, perhaps, have belonged to some
citizen, or foreigner, or the middle class--some moody Northman, some
solitary Egyptian, some scheming Jew.  Yet, though it was not
possessed, in itself, of any remarkable or decided character, the Goth
experienced a mysterious, almost an eager curiosity to examine its
interior.  He could assign no cause, discover no excuse for the act, as
he slowly mounted the steps before him.  Some invisible and
incomprehensible magnet attracted him to the dwelling.  If his return
had been suddenly commanded by Alaric himself; if evidences of
indubitable treachery had lurked about the solitary place, at the
moment when he thrust open its unbarred door, he felt that he must
still have proceeded upon his onward course.  The next instant he
entered the house.  The light streamed through the open entrance into
the gloomy hall; the night-wind, rushing upon its track, blew shrill
and dreary among the stone pillars, and in the hidden crevices and
untenanted chambers above.  Not a sign of life appeared, not a sound of
a footstep was audible, not even an article of household use was to be
seen.  The deserted suburbs rose without, like a wilderness; and this
empty house looked within, like a sepulchre--void of corpses, and yet
eloquent of death!

There was an inexplicable fascination to the eyes of the Goth about
this vault-like, solitary hall. He stood motionless at its entrance,
gazing dreamily at the gloomy prospect before him, until a strong gust
of wind suddenly forced the outer door further backwards, and at the
same moment admitted a larger stream of light.

The place was not empty.  In a corner of the hall, hitherto sunk in
darkness, crouched a shadowy form.  It was enveloped in a dark garment,
and huddled up into an indefinable and unfamiliar shape.  Nothing
appeared on it, as a denoting sign of humanity, but one pale hand,
holding the black drapery together, and relieved against it in almost
ghastly contrast under the cold light of the moon.


Vague remembrances of the awful superstitions of his nation's ancient
worship, hurried over the memory of the young Goth, at the first moment
of his discovery of the ghost-like occupant of the hall.  As he stood
in fixed attention before the motionless figure, it soon began to be
endowed with the same strange influence over his will, that the lonely
house had already exerted. He advanced slowly towards the crouching
form.

It never stirred at the noise of his approach.  The pale hand still
held the mantle over the compressed figure, with the same rigid
immobility of grasp.  Brave as he was, Hermanric shuddered as he bent
down and touched the bloodless, icy fingers.  At that action, as if
endowed with instant vitality from contact with a living being, the
figure suddenly started up.

Then, the folds of the dark mantle fell back, disclosing a face as pale
in hue as the stone pillars around it; and the voice of the solitary
being became audible, uttering in faint, monotonous accents, these
words:--

'He has forgotten and abandoned me!--slay me if you will!--I am ready
to die!'

Broken, untuned as it was, there yet lurked in that voice a tone of its
old music, there beamed in that vacant and heavy eye a ray of its
native gentleness.  With a sudden exclamation of compassion and
surprise, the Goth stepped forward, raised the trembling outcast in his
arms; and, in the impulse of the moment quitting the solitary house,
stood the next instant on the firm earth, and under the starry sky,
once more united to the charge that he had abandoned--to Antonina whom
he had lost.

He spoke to her, caressed her, entreated her pardon, assured her of his
future care; but she neither answered nor recognised him.  She never
looked in his face, never moved in his arms, never petitioned for
mercy. She gave no sign of life or being, saving that she moaned at
regular intervals in piteous accents:--'He has forgotten and abandoned
me!' as if that one simple expression comprised in itself, her
acknowledgment of the uselessness of her life, and her dirge for her
expected death.

The Goth's countenance whitened to his very lips.  He began to fear
that her faculties had sunk under her trials.  He hurried on with her
with trembling steps towards the open country, for he nourished a
dreamy, intuitive hope, that the sight of those woods and fields and
mountains which she had extolled to him, in her morning's entreaty for
protection, might aid in restoring her suspended consciousness, if she
now looked on them.

He ran forward, until he had left the suburbs at least half a mile
behind him, and had reached an eminence, bounded on each side by high
grass banks and clustering woods, and commanding a narrow, yet various
prospect, of the valley ground beneath, and the fertile plains that
extended beyond.

Here the warrior paused with his burden; and, seating himself on the
bank, once more attempted to calm the girl's continued bewilderment and
terror.  He thought not on his sentinels, whom he had abandoned--on his
absence from the suburbs, which might be perceived and punished by an
unexpected visit, at his deserted quarters, from his superiors in the
camp.  The social influence that sways the world; the fragile idol at
whose shrine pride learns to bow, and insensibility to feel; the soft,
grateful influence of yielding nature yet eternal rule--the influence
of woman, source alike of virtues and crimes, of earthly glories and
earthly disasters--had, in this moment of anguish and expectation,
silenced in him every appeal of duty, and overthrown every obstacle of
selfish doubt.  He now spoke to Antonina as alluringly as a woman, as
gently as a child.  He caressed her as warmly as a lover, as cheerfully
as a brother, as kindly as a father. He--the rough, northern warrior,
whose education had been of arms, and whose youthful aspirations had
been taught to point towards strife and bloodshed and glory--even he
was now endowed with the tender eloquence of pity and love--with
untiring, skilful care--with calm, enduring patience.


Gently and unceasingly he plied his soothing task; and soon, to his joy
and triumph, he beheld the approaching reward of his efforts, in the
slow changes that became gradually perceptible in the girl's face and
manner.  She raised herself in his arms, looked up fixedly and vacantly
into his face, then round upon the bright, quiet landscape, then back
again more stedfastly upon her companion; and at length, trembling
violently, she whispered softly and several times the young Goth's
name, glancing at him anxiously and apprehensively, as if she feared
and doubted while she recognised him.

'You are bearing me to my death,'--said she suddenly.  'You, who once
protected me--you, who forsook me!--You are luring me into the power of
the woman who thirsts for my blood!--Oh, it is horrible--horrible!'

She paused, averted her face, and shuddering violently, disengaged
herself from his arms.  After an interval, she continued:--

'Through the long day, and in the beginning of the cold night, I have
waited in one solitary place for the death that is in store for me!  I
have suffered all the loneliness of my hours of expectation, without
complaint; I have listened with little dread, and no grief, for the
approach of my enemy who has sworn that she will shed my blood!  Having
none to love me, and being a stranger in the land of my own nation, I
have nothing to live for!  But it is a bitter misery to me to behold in
you the fulfiller of my doom; to be snatched by the hand of Hermanric
from the heritage of life that I have so long struggled to preserve!'

Her voice had altered, as she pronounced these words, to an impressive
lowness and mournfulness of tone.  Its quiet, saddened accents were
expressive of an almost divine resignation and sorrow; they seemed to
be attuned to a mysterious and untraceable harmony with the melancholy
stillness of the night-landscape.  As she now stood looking up with
pale, calm countenance, and gentle, tearless eyes, into the sky whose
moonlight brightness shone softly over her form, the Virgin watching
the approach of her angel messenger could hardly have been adorned with
a more pure and simple loveliness, than now dwelt over the features of
Numerian's forsaken child.

No longer master of his agitation; filled with awe, grief, and despair,
as he looked on the victim of his heartless impatience; Hermanric bowed
himself at the girl's feet, and, in the passionate utterance of real
remorse, offered up his supplications for pardon and his assurances of
protection and love.  All that the reader has already learned--the
bitter self-upbraidings of his evening, the sorrowful wanderings of his
night, the mysterious attraction that led him to the solitary house,
his joy at once more discovering his lost charge--all these confessions
he now poured forth in the simple yet powerful eloquence of strong
emotion and true regret.

Gradually and amazedly, as she listened to his words, Antonina awoke
from her abstraction. Even the expression of his countenance and the
earnestness of his manner, viewed by the intuitive penetration of her
sex, wrought with kind and healing influence on her mind.  She started
suddenly, a bright flush flew over her colourless cheeks; she bent
down, and looked earnestly and wistfully into the Goth's face.  Her
lips moved, but her quick convulsive breathing stifled the words that
she vainly endeavoured to form.

'Yes,' continued Hermanric, rising and drawing her towards him again,
'you shall never mourn, never fear, never weep more!  Though you have
lost your father, and the people of your nation are as strangers to
you, though you have been threatened and forsaken, you shall still be
beautiful--still be happy; for I will watch you, and you shall never be
harmed; I will labour for you, and you shall never want!  People and
kindred--fame and duty, I will abandon them all to make atonement to
you!'

Its youthful freshness and hope returned to the girl's heart, as water
to the long-parched spring, when the young warrior ceased.  The tears
stood in her eyes, but she neither sighed nor spoke. Her frame trembled
all over with the excess of her astonishment and delight, as she still
steadfastly looked on him and still listened intently as he proceeded:--


'Fear, then, no longer for your safety--Goisvintha, whom you dread, is
far from us; she knows not that we are here; she cannot track our
footsteps now, to threaten or to harm you!  Remember no more how you
have suffered and I have sinned!  Think only how bitterly I have
repented our morning's separation, and how gladly I welcome our meeting
of to-night!  Oh, Antonina! you are beautiful with a wondrous
loveliness, you are young with a perfected and unchildlike youth, your
words fall upon my ear with the music of a song of the olden time; it
is like a dream of the spirits that my fathers worshipped, when I look
up and behold you at my side!'

An expression of mingled confusion, pleasure, and surprise, flushed the
girl's half-averted countenance as she listened to the Goth.  She rose
with a smile of ineffable gratitude and delight, and pointed to the
prospect beyond, as she softly rejoined:--

'Let us go a little further onward, where the moonlight shines over the
meadow below.  My heart is bursting in this shadowy place!  Let us seek
the light that is yonder; it seems happy like me!'

They walked forward; and as they went, she told him again of the
sorrows of her past day; of her lonely and despairing progress from his
tent to the solitary house where he had found her in the night, and
where she had resigned herself from the first to meet a death that had
little horror for her then.  There was no thought of reproach, no
utterance of complaint, in this renewal of her melancholy narration.
It was solely that she might luxuriate afresh in those delighting
expressions of repentance and devotion, which she knew that it would
call forth from the lips of Hermanric, that she now thought of
addressing him once more with the tale of her grief.

As they still went onward; as she listened to the rude fervent
eloquence of the language of the Goth; as she looked on the deep repose
of the landscape, and the soft transparency of the night sky; her mind,
ever elastic under the shock of the most violent emotions, ever ready
to regain its wonted healthfulness and hope--now recovered its old
tone, and re-assumed its accustomed balance.  Again her memory began to
store itself with its beloved remembrances, and her heart to rejoice in
its artless longings and visionary thoughts.  In spite of all her fears
and all her sufferings, she now walked on blest in a disposition that
woe had no shadow to darken long, and neglect no influence to warp;
still as happy in herself; even yet as forgetful of her past, as
hopeful for her future, as on that first evening when we beheld her in
her father's garden, singing to the music of her lute.

Insensibly as they proceeded, they had diverged from the road, had
entered a bye-path, and now stood before a gate which led to a small
farm house, surrounded by its gardens and vineyards, and, like the
suburbs that they had quitted, deserted by its inhabitants on the
approach of the Goths.  They passed through the gate, and arriving at
the plot of ground in front of the house, paused for a moment to look
around them.

The meadows had been already stripped of their grass, and the young
trees of their branches by the foragers of the invading army, but here
the destruction of the little property had been stayed. The house with
its neat thatched roof and shutters of variegated wood, the garden with
its small stock of fruit and its carefully tended beds of rare flowers,
designed probably to grace the feast of a nobleman or the statue of a
martyr, had presented no allurements to the rough tastes of Alaric's
soldiery.  Not a mark of a footstep appeared on the turf before the
house door; the ivy crept in its wonted luxuriance about the pillars of
the lowly porch; and as Hermanric and Antonina walked towards the
fish-pond at the extremity of the garden, the few water-fowl placed
there by the owners of the cottage, came swimming towards the bank, as
if to welcome in their solitude the appearance of a human form.


Far from being melancholy, there was something soothing and attractive
about the loneliness of the deserted farm.  Its ravaged outhouses and
plundered meadows, which might have appeared desolate by day, were so
distanced, softened, and obscured, by the atmosphere of night, that
they presented no harsh contrast to the prevailing smoothness and
luxuriance of the landscape around.  As Antonina beheld the brightened
fields and the shadowed woods, here mingled, there succeeding each
other, stretched far onward and onward until they joined the distant
mountains, that eloquent voice of nature, whose audience is the human
heart, and whose theme is eternal love, spoke inspiringly to her
attentive senses.  She stretched out her arms as she looked with steady
and enraptured gaze upon the bright view before her, as if she longed
to see its beauties resolved into a single and living form--into a
spirit human enough to be addressed, and visible enough to be adored.

'Beautiful earth!' she murmured softly to herself, 'Thy mountains are
the watch-towers of angels, thy moonlight is the shadow of God!'

Her eyes filled with bright, happy tears; she turned to Hermanric, who
stood watching her, and continued:--

'Have you never thought that light, and air, and the perfume of
flowers, might contain some relics of the beauties of Eden that escaped
with Eve, when she wandered into the lonely world? They glowed and
breathed for her, and she lived and was beautiful in them!  They were
united to one another, as the sunbeam is united to the earth that it
warms; and could the sword of the cherubim have sundered them at once?
When Eve went forth, did the closed gates shut back in the empty
Paradise, all the beauty that had clung, and grown, and shone round
her?  Did no ray of her native light steal forth after her into the
desolateness of the world?  Did no print of her lost flowers remain on
the bosom they must once have pressed?  It cannot be!  A part of her
possessions of Eden must have been spared to her with a part of her
life.  She must have refined the void air of the earth when she entered
it, with a breath of the fragrant breezes, and gleam of the truant
sunshine of her lost Paradise!  They must have strengthened and
brightened, and must now be strengthening and brightening with the slow
lapse of mortal years, until, in the time when earth itself will be an
Eden, they shall be made one again with the hidden world of perfection,
from which they are yet separated.  So that, even now, as I look forth
over the landscape, the light that I behold has in it a glow of
Paradise, and this flower that I gather a breath of the fragrance that
once stole over the senses of my first mother, Eve!'

Though she paused here, as if in expectation of an answer, the Goth
preserved an unbroken silence.  Neither by nature nor position was he
capable of partaking the wild fancies and aspiring thoughts, drawn by
the influences of the external world from their concealment in
Antonina's heart.

The mystery of his present situation; his vague remembrance of the
duties he had abandoned; the uncertainty of his future fortunes and
future fate; the presence of the lonely being so inseparably connected
with his past emotions and his existence to come, so strangely
attractive by her sex, her age, her person, her misfortunes, and her
endowments; all contributed to bewilder his faculties.  Goisvintha, the
army, the besieged city, the abandoned suburbs, seemed to hem him in
like a circle of shadowy and threatening judgments; and in the midst of
them stood the young denizen of Rome, with her eloquent countenance and
her inspiring words, ready to hurry him, he knew not whither, and able
to influence him, he felt not how.

Unconsciously interpreting her companion's silence into a wish to
change the scene and the discourse, Antonina, after lingering over the
view from the garden for a moment longer, led the way back towards the
untenanted house.  They removed the wooden padlock from the door of the
dwelling, and guided by the brilliant moonlight, entered its principal
apartment.


The homely adornments of the little room had remained undisturbed, and
dimly distinguishable though they now were, gave it to the eyes of the
two strangers, the same aspect of humble comfort which had probably
once endeared it to its exiled occupants.  As Hermanric seated himself
by Antonina's side on the simple couch which made the principal piece
of furniture in the place, and looked forth from the window over the
same view that they had beheld in the garden, the magic stillness and
novelty of the scene now began to affect his slow perceptions, as they
had already influenced the finer and more sensitive faculties of the
thoughtful girl.  New hopes and tranquil ideas arose in his young mind,
and communicated an unusual gentleness to his expression, an unusual
softness to his voice, as he thus addressed his silent companion:--

'With such a home as this, with this garden, with that country beyond,
with no warfare, no stern teachers, no enemy to threaten you; with
companions and occupations that you loved--tell me, Antonina, would not
your happiness be complete?'

As he looked round at the girl to listen to her reply, he saw that her
countenance had changed. Their past expression of deep grief had again
returned to her features.  Her eyes were fixed on the short dagger that
hung over the Goth's breast, which seemed to have suddenly aroused in
her a train of melancholy and unwelcome thoughts.  When she at length
spoke, it was in a mournful and altered voice, and with a mingled
expression of resignation and despair.

'You must leave me--we must be parted again,' said she; 'the sight of
your weapons has reminded me of all that until now I had forgotten, of
all that I have left in Rome, of all that you have abandoned before the
city walls.  Once I thought we might have escaped together from the
turmoil and the danger around us, but now I know that it is better that
you should depart! Alas! for my hopes and my happiness, I must be left
alone once more!'

She paused for an instant, struggling to retain her self-possession,
and then continued:--

'Yes, you must quit me, and return to your post before the city; for in
the day of assault there will be none to care for my father but you!
Until I know that he is safe, until I can see him once more, and ask
him for pardon, and entreat him for love, I dare not remove from the
perilous precincts of Rome!  Return, then, to your duties, and your
companions, and your occupations of martial renown; and do not forget
Numerian when the city is assailed, nor Antonina, who is left to think
on you in the solitary plains!'

She rose from her place, as if to set the example of departing; but her
strength and resolution both failed her, and she sank down again on the
couch, incapable of making another movement, or uttering another word.

Strong and conflicting emotions passed over the heart of the Goth.  The
language of the girl had quickened the remembrance of his
half-forgotten duties, and strengthened the failing influence of his
old predilections of education and race.  Both conscience and
inclination now opposed his disputing her urgent and unselfish request.
For a few minutes he remained in deep reflection; then he rose and
looked earnestly from the window; then back again upon Antonina and the
room they occupied.  At length, as if animated by a sudden
determination, he again approached his companion, and thus addressed
her:--

'It is right that I should return.  I will do your bidding, and depart
for the camp (but not till the break of day), while you, Antonina,
remain in concealment and in safety here.  None can come hither to
disturb you.  The Goths will not revisit the fields they have already
stripped; the husbandman who owns this dwelling is imprisoned in the
beleaguered city; the peasants from the country beyond dare not
approach so near to the invading hosts; and Goisvintha, whom you dread,
knows not even of the existence of such a refuge as this.  Here, though
lonely, you will be secure; here you can await my return, when each
succeeding night gives me the opportunity of departing from the camp;
and here I will warn you beforehand, if the city is devoted to an
assault.  Though solitary, you will not be abandoned--we shall not be
parted one from the other. Often and often I shall return to look on
you, and to listen to you, and to love you!  You will be happier here,
even in this lonely place, than in the former home that you have lost
through your father's wrath!'


'Oh!  I will willingly remain--I will joyfully await you!' cried the
girl, raising her beaming eyes to Hermanric's face.  'I will never
speak mournfully to you again; I will never remind you more of all that
I have suffered, and all that I have lost!  How merciful you were to
me, when I first saw you in your tent--how doubly merciful you are to
me here!  I am proud when I look on your stature, and your strength,
and your heavy weapons, and know that you are happy in remaining with
me; that you will succour my father; that you will return from your
glittering encampments to this farm-house, where I am left to await
you!  Already I have forgotten all that has happened to me of woe;
already I am more joyful than ever I was in my life before!  See, I am
no longer weeping in sorrow!  If there are any tears still on my
cheeks, they are the tears of gladness that every one welcomes--tears
to sing and rejoice in!'

She ceased abruptly, as if words failed to give expression to her new
delight.  All the gloomy emotions that had oppressed her but a short
time before had now completely vanished; and the young, fresh heart,
superior still to despair and woe, basked as happily again in its
native atmosphere of joy as a bird in the sunlight of morning and
spring.

Then, when after an interval of delay their former tranquility had
returned to them, how softly and lightly the quiet hours of the
remaining night flowed onward to the two watchers in the lonely house!
How gladly the delighted girl disclosed her hidden thoughts, and poured
forth her innocent confessions, to the dweller among other nations and
the child of other impressions than her own! All the various
reflections aroused in her mind by the natural objects she had secretly
studied, by the mighty imagery of her Bible lore, by the gloomy
histories of saints' visions and martyrs' sufferings, which she had
learnt and pondered over by her father's side, were now drawn from
their treasured places in her memory, and addressed to the ear of the
Goth.  As the child flies to the nurse with the story of its first toy;
as the girl resorts to the sister with the confession of her first
love; as the poet hurries to the friend with the plan of his first
composition; so did Antonina seek the attention of Hermanric with the
first outward revealings enjoyed by her faculties and the first
acknowledgment of her emotions liberated from her heart.

The longer the Goth listened to her, the more perfect became the
enchantment of her words, half struggling into poetry, and her voice
half gliding into music.  As her low, still, varying tones wound
smoothly into his ear, his thoughts suddenly and intuitively reverted
to her formerly expressed remembrances of her lost lute, inciting him
to ask her, with new interest and animation, of the manner of her
acquisition of that knowledge of song, which she had already assured
him that she possessed.

'I have learned many odes of many poets,' said she, quickly and
confusedly avoiding the mention of Vetranio, which a direct answer to
Hermanric's question must have produced, 'but I remember none
perfectly, save those whose theme is of spirits and of other worlds,
and of the invisible beauty that we think of but cannot see.  Of the
few that I know of these, there is one that I first learned and loved
most.  I will sing it, that you may be assured I will not fail to you
in my promised art.'

She hesitated for a moment.  Sorrowful remembrances of the events that
had followed the utterance of the last notes she sang in her father's
garden, swelled within her, and held her speechless.  Soon, however,
after a short interval of silence, she recovered her self-possession,
and began to sing, in low tremulous tones, that harmonised well with
the character of the words and the strain of the melody which she had
chosen.

THE MISSION OF THE TEAR


I.

    The skies were its birth-place--the TEAR was the child
    Of the dark maiden SORROW, by young JOY beguil'd;
    It was born in convulsion; 'twas nurtur'd in woe;
    And the world was yet young when it wander'd below.


II.

    No angel-bright guardians watch'd over its birth,
    Ere yet it was suffer'd to roam upon earth;
    No spirits of gladness its soft form caress'd;
    SIGHS mourned round its cradle, and hush'd it to rest.


III.

    Though JOY might endeavour, with kisses and wiles,
    To lure it away to his household of smiles:
    From the daylight he lived in it turn'd in affright,
    To nestle with SORROW in climates of night.


IV.

    When it came upon earth, 'twas to choose a career,
    The brightest and best that is left to a TEAR;
    To hallow delight, and bestow the relief
    Denied by despair to the fulness of grief.


V.

    Few repell'd it--some bless'd it--wherever it came;
    Whether soft'ning their sorrow, or soothing their shame;
    And the joyful themselves, though its name they might fear,
    Oft welcom'd the calming approach of the TEAR!


VI.

    Years on years have worn onward, as--watch'd from above--
    Speeds that meek spirit yet on its labour of love;
    Still the exile of Heav'n, it ne'er shall away,
    Every heart has a home for it, roam where it may!

For the first few minutes after she had concluded the ode, Hermanric
was hardly conscious that she had ceased; and when at length she looked
up at him, her mute petition for approval had an eloquence which would
have been marred to the Goth at that moment, by the utterance of single
word. A rapture, an inspiration, a new life moved within him.  The hour
and the scene completed what the magic of the song had begun.  His
expression now glowed with a southern warmth; his words assumed a Roman
fervour.  Gradually, as they discoursed, the voice of the girl was less
frequently audible.  A change was passing over her spirit; from the
teacher, she was now becoming the pupil.

As she still listened to the Goth, as she felt the birth of new
feelings within her while he spoke, her cheeks glowed, her features
lightened up, her very form seemed to freshen and expand.  No intruding
thought or awakening remembrance disturbed her rapt attention.  No cold
doubt, no gloomy hesitation, appeared in her companion's words.  The
one listened, the other spoke, with the whole heart, the undivided
soul.  While a world-wide revolution was concentrating its hurricane
forces around them; while the city of an Empire tottered already to its
tremendous fall; while Goisvintha plotted new revenge; while Ulpius
toiled for his revolution of bloodshed and ruin; while all these dark
materials of public misery and private strife seethed and strengthened
around them, they could as completely forget the stormy outward world,
in themselves; they could think as serenely of tranquil love; the kiss
could be given as passionately and returned as tenderly, as if the lot
of their existence had been cast in the pastoral days of the shepherd
poets, and the future of their duties and enjoyments was securely
awaiting them in a land of eternal peace!



CHAPTER 14.

THE FAMINE.

The end of November is approaching.  Nearly a month has elapsed since
the occurrence of the events mentioned in the last chapter, yet still
the Gothic lines stretch round the city walls.  Rome, that we left
haughty and luxurious even while ruin threatened her at her gates, has
now suffered a terrible and warning change.  As we approach her again,
woe, horror, and desolation have already gone forth to shadow her lofty
palaces and to darken her brilliant streets.


Over Pomp that spurned it, over Pleasure that defied it, over Plenty
that scared it in its secret rounds, the spectre Hunger has now risen
triumphant at last.  Day by day has the city's insufficient allowance
of food been more and more sparingly doled out; higher and higher has
risen the value of the coarsest and simplest provision; the hoarded
supplies that pity and charity have already bestowed to cheer the
sinking people have reached their utmost limits.  For the rich, there
is still corn in the city--treasure of food to be bartered for treasure
of gold.  For the poor, man's natural nourishment exists no more; the
season of famine's loathsome feasts, the first days of the sacrifice of
choice to necessity have darkly and irretrievably begun.

It is morning.  A sad and noiseless throng is advancing over the cold
flagstones of the great square before the Basilica of St. John Lateran.
The members of the assembly speak in whispers. The weak are
tearful--the strong are gloomy--they all move with slow and languid
gait, and hold in their arms their dogs or other domestic animals.  On
the outskirts of the crowd march the enfeebled guards of the city,
grasping in their rough hands rare favourite birds of gaudy plumage and
melodious note, and followed by children and young girls vainly and
piteously entreating that their favourites may be restored.

This strange procession pauses, at length, before a mighty caldron
slung over a great fire in the middle of the square, round which stand
the city butchers with bare knives, and the trustiest men of the Roman
legions with threatening weapons.  A proclamation is then repeated,
commanding the populace who have no money left to purchase food, to
bring up their domestic animals to be boiled together over the public
furnace, for the sake of contributing to the public support.

The next minute, in pursuance of this edict, the dumb favourites of the
crowd passed from the owner's caressing hand into the butcher's ready
grasp.  The faint cries of the animals, starved like their masters,
mingled for a few moments with the sobs and lamentations of the women
and children, to whom the greater part of them belonged.  For, in this
the first stage of their calamities, that severity of hunger which
extinguishes pity and estranges grief was unknown to the populace; and
though fast losing spirit, they had not yet sunk to the depths of
ferocious despair which even now were invisibly opening between them.
A thousand pangs were felt, a thousand humble tragedies were acted, in
the brief moments of separation between guardian and charge.  The child
snatched its last kiss of the bird that had sung over its bed; the dog
looked its last entreaty for protection from the mistress who had once
never met it without a caress.  Then came the short interval of agony
and death, then the steam rose fiercely from the greedy caldron, and
then the people for a time dispersed; the sorrowful to linger near the
confines of the fire, and the hungry to calm their impatience by a
visit to the neighbouring church.

The marble aisles of the noble basilica held a gloomy congregation.
Three small candles were alone lighted on the high altar.  No sweet
voices sang melodious anthems or exulting hymns. The monks, in hoarse
tones and monotonous harmonics, chanted the penitential psalms.  Here
and there knelt a figure clothed in mourning robes, and absorbed in
secret prayer; but over the majority of the assembly either blank
despondency or sullen inattention universally prevailed.

As the last dull notes of the last psalm died away among the lofty
recesses of the church, a procession of pious Christians appeared at
the door and advanced slowly to the altar.  It was composed both of men
and women barefooted, clothed in black garments, and with ashes
scattered over their dishevelled hair.  Tears flowed from their eyes,
and they beat their breasts as they bowed their foreheads on the marble
pavement of the altar steps.


This humble public expression of penitence under the calamity that had
now fallen on the city was, however, confined only to its few really
religious inhabitants, and commanded neither sympathy nor attention
from the heartless and obstinate population of Rome.  Some still
cherished the delusive hope of assistance from the court at Ravenna;
others believed that the Goths would ere long impatiently abandon their
protracted blockade, to stretch their ravages over the rich and
unprotected fields of Southern Italy.  But the same blind confidence in
the lost terrors of the Roman name, the same fierce and reckless
determination to defy the Goths to the very last, sustained the sinking
courage and suppressed the despondent emotions of the great mass of the
suffering people, from the beggar who prowled for garbage, to the
patrician who sighed over his new and unwelcome nourishment of simple
bread.

While the penitents who formed the procession above described were yet
engaged in the performance of their unnoticed and unshared duties of
penance and prayer, a priest ascended the great pulpit of the basilica,
to attempt the ungrateful task of preaching patience and piety to the
hungry multitude at his feet.

He began his sermon by retracing the principal occurrences in Rome
since the beginning of the Gothic blockade.  He touched cautiously upon
the first event that stained the annals of the besieged city--the
execution of the widow of the Roman general Stilicho, on the
unauthorised suspicion that she had held treasonable communication with
Alaric and the invading army; he noticed lengthily the promises of
assistance transmitted from Ravenna, after the perpetration of that
ill-omened act. He spoke admiringly of the skill displayed by the
government in making the necessary and immediate reductions in the
daily supplies of food; he lamented the terrible scarcity which
followed, too inevitably, those seasonable reductions.  He pronounced
an eloquent eulogium on the noble charity of Laeta, the widow of the
Emperor Gratian, who, with her mother, devoted the store of provisions
obtained by their imperial revenues to succouring, at that important
juncture, the starving and desponding poor:  he admitted the new
scarcity, consequent on the dissipation of Laeta's stores; deplored the
present necessity of sacrificing the domestic animals of the citizens;
condemned the enormous prices now demanded for the last remnants of
wholesome food that were garnered up; announced it as the firm
persuasion of every one that a few days more would bring help from
Ravenna; and ended his address by informing his auditory that, as they
had suffered so much already, they could patiently suffer a little
more, and that if, after this, they were so ill-fated as to sink under
their calamities, they would feel it a noble consolation to die in the
cause of Catholic and Apostolic Rome, and would assuredly be canonised
as saints and martyrs by the next generation of the pious in the first
interval of fertile and restoring peace.

Flowing as was the eloquence of this oration, it yet possessed not the
power of inducing one among those whom it addressed to forget the
sensation of his present suffering, and to fix his attention on the
vision of future advantage, spread before all listeners by the fluent
priest.  With the same murmurs of querulous complaint, and the same
expressions of impotent hatred and defiance of the Goths which had
fallen from them as they entered the church, the populace now departed
from it, to receive from the city officers the stinted allowance of
repugnant food, prepared for their hunger from the caldron in the
public square.

And see, already from other haunts in the neighbouring quarter of Rome
their fellow-citizens press onward at the given signal, to meet them
round the caldron's sides!  The languid sentinel, released from duty,
turns his gaze from the sickening prospect of the Gothic camp, and
hastens to share the public meal; the baker starts from sleeping on his
empty counter, the beggar rises from his kennel in the butcher's vacant
out-house, the slave deserts his place by the smouldering
kitchen-fire--all hurry to swell the numbers of the guests that are
bidden to the wretched feast. Rapidly and confusedly, the congregation
in the basilica pours through its lofty gates; the priests and
penitents retire from the altar's foot, and in the great church, so
crowded but a few moments before, there now only remains the figure of
a solitary man.


Since the commencement of the service, neither addressed nor observed,
this lonely being has faltered round the circle of the congregation,
gazing long and wistfully over the faces that met his view.  Now that
the sermon is ended, and the last lingerer has quitted the church, he
turns from the spot whence he has anxiously watched the different
members of the departing throng, and feebly crouches down on his knees
at the base of a pillar that is near him.  His eyes are hollow, and his
cheeks are wan; his thin grey hairs are few and fading on his aged
head. He makes no effort to follow the crowd and partake their
sustenance; no one is left behind to urge, no one returns to lead him
to the public meal.  Though weak and old, he is perfectly forsaken in
his loneliness, perfectly unsolaced in his grief; his friends have lost
all trace of him; his enemies have ceased to fear or to hate him now.
As he crouches by the pillar alone, he covers his forehead with his
pale, palsied hands, his dim eyes fill with bitter tears, and such
expressions as these are ever and anon faintly audible in the intervals
of his heavy sighs:  'Day after day!  Day after day!  And my lost one
is not found! my loved and wronged one is not restored!  Antonina!
Antonina!'

Some days after the public distribution of food in the square of St.
John Lateran, Vetranio's favourite freedman might have been observed
pursuing his way homeward, sadly and slowly, to his master's palace.

It was not without cause that the pace of the intelligent Carrio was
funereal and his expression disconsolate.  Even during the short period
that had elapsed since the scene in the basilica already described, the
condition of the city had altered fearfully for the worse.  The famine
advanced with giant strides; every succeeding hour endued it with new
vigour, every effort to repel it served but to increase its spreading
and overwhelming influence.  One after another the pleasures and
pursuits of the city declined beneath the dismal oppression of the
universal ill, until the public spirit in Rome became moved alike in
all classes by one gloomy inspiration--a despairing defiance of the
famine and the Goths.

The freedman entered his master's palace neither saluted nor welcomed
by the once obsequious slaves in the outer lodge.  Neither harps nor
singing-boys, neither woman's ringing laughter nor man's bacchanalian
glee, now woke the echoes in the lonely halls.  The pulse of pleasure
seemed to have throbbed its last in the joyless being of Vetranio's
altered household.

Hastening his steps as he entered the mansion, Carrio passed into the
chamber where the senator awaited him.

On two couches, separated by a small table, reclined the lord of the
palace and his pupil and companion at Ravenna, the once sprightly
Camilla.  Vetranio's open brow had contracted a clouded and severe
expression, and he neither regarded nor addressed his visitor, who, on
her part, remained as silent and as melancholy as himself.  Every trace
of the former characteristics of the gay, elegant voluptuary and the
lively, prattling girl seemed to have completely vanished. On the table
between them stood a large bottle containing Falernian wine, and a vase
filled with a little watery soup, in the middle of which floated a
small dough cake, sparingly sprinkled with common herbs.  As for the
usual accompaniments of Vetranio's luxurious privacy, they were nowhere
to be seen.  Poems, pictures, trinkets, lutes, all were absent.  Even
the 'inestimable kitten of the breed most worshipped by the ancient
Egyptians' appeared no more.  It had been stolen, cooked, and eaten by
a runaway slave, who had already bartered its ruby collar for a lean
parrot and the unroasted half of the carcase of a dog.

'I lament to confess it, O estimable patron, but my mission has
failed,' observed Carrio, producing from his cloak several bags of
money and boxes of jewels, which he carefully deposited on the table.
'The Prefect has himself assisted in searching the public and private
granaries, and has arrived at the conclusion that not a handful of corn
is left in the city.  I offered publicly in the market-place five
thousand sestertii for a living cock and hen, but was told that the
race had long since been exterminated, and that, as money would no
longer buy food, money was no longer desired by the poorest beggar in
Rome.  There is no more even of the hay I yesterday purchased to be
obtained for the most extravagant bribes.  Those still possessing the
smallest supplies of provision guard and hide them with the most
jealous care.  I have done nothing but obtain for the consumption of
the few slaves who yet remain faithful in the house this small store of
dogs' hides, reserved from the public distribution of some days since
in the square of the Basilica of St. John.'


And the freedman, with an air of mingled triumph and disgust, produced
as he spoke his provision of dirty skins.

'What supplies have we still left in our possession?' demanded
Vetranio, after drinking a deep draught of the Falernian, and motioning
his servant to place his treasured burden out of sight.

'I have hidden in a secure receptacle, for I know not how soon hunger
may drive the slaves to disobedience,' rejoined Carrio, 'seven bags of
hay, three baskets stocked with salted horse-flesh, a sweetmeat-box
filled with oats, and another with dried parsley; the rare Indian
singing birds are still preserved inviolate in their aviary; there is a
great store of spices, and some bottles of the Nightingale Sauce yet
remain.'

'What is the present aspect of the city?' interrupted Vetranio
impatiently.

'Rome is as gloomy as a subterranean sepulchre,' replied Carrio, with a
shudder.  'The people congregate in speechless and hungry mobs at the
doors of their houses and the corners of the streets, the sentinels at
the ramparts totter on their posts, women and children are sleeping
exhausted on the very pavements of the churches, the theatres are
emptied of actors and audience alike, the baths resound with cries for
food and curses on the Goths, thefts are already committed in the open
and unguarded shops, and the barbarians remain fixed in their
encampments, unapproached by our promised legions from Ravenna, neither
assaulting us in our weakness, nor preparing to raise the blockade!
Our situation grows more and more perilous.  I have great hopes in our
store of provisions; but--'

'Cast your hopes to the court at Ravenna, and your beasts' provender to
the howling mob!' cried Vetranio with sudden energy.  'It is now too
late to yield; if the next few days bring us no assistance, the city
will be a human shambles!  And think you that I, who have already lost
in this public suspension of social joys my pleasures, my employments,
and my companions, will wait serenely for the lingering and ignoble
death that must then threaten us all?  No, it shall never be said that
I died starving with the herd, like a slave that his master deserts!
Though the plates in my banqueting hall must now be empty, my vases and
wine-cups shall yet sparkle for my guests!  There is still wine in the
cellar, and spices and perfumes remain in the larder stores!  I will
invite my friends to a last feast; a saturnalia in a city of famine; a
banquet of death, spread by the jovial labours of Silenus and his
fauns! Though the Parcae have woven for me the destiny of a dog, it is
the hand of Bacchus that shall sever the fatal thread!'

His cheeks were flushed, his eyes sparkled; all the mad energy of his
determination appeared in his face as he spoke.  He was no longer the
light, amiable, smooth-tongued trifler, but a moody, reckless,
desperate man, careless of every obligation and pursuit which had
hitherto influenced the easy surface of his patrician life.  The
startled Camilla, who had as yet preserved a melancholy silence, ran
towards him with affrighted looks and undissembled tears.  Carrio
stared in vacant astonishment on his master's disordered countenance;
and, forgetting his bundle of dogskins, suffered them to drop unheeded
on the floor.  A momentary silence followed, which was suddenly
interrupted by the abrupt entrance of a fourth person, pale, trembling
and breathless, who was no other than Vetranio's former visitor, the
Prefect Pompeianus.

'I bid you welcome to my approaching feast of brimming wine-cups and
empty dishes!' cried Vetranio, pouring the sparkling Falernian into his
empty glass.  'The last banquet given in Rome, ere the city is
annihilated, will be mine!  The Goths and the famine shall have no part
in my death! Pleasure shall preside at my last moments, as it has
presided at my whole life!  I will die like Sardanapalus, with my loves
and my treasures around me, and the last of my guests who remains proof
against our festivity shall set fire to my palace, as the kingly
Assyrian set fire to his!'


'This is no season for jesting,' exclaimed the Prefect, staring round
him with bewildered eyes and colourless cheeks.  'Our miseries are but
dawning as yet!  In the next street lies the corpse of a woman,
and--horrible omen!--a coil of serpents is wreathed about her neck!  We
have no burial-place to receive her, and the thousands who may die like
her, ere assistance arrives.  The city sepulchres outside the walls are
in the hands of the Goths.  The people stand round the body in a trance
of horror, for they have now discovered a fatal truth we would fain
have concealed from them--' Here the Prefect paused, looked round
affrightedly on his listeners, and then added in low trembling tones--

'The citizens are lying dead from famine in the streets of Rome!'



CHAPTER 15.

THE CITY AND THE GODS.

We return once more to the Gothic encampment in the suburbs eastward of
the Pincian Gate, and to Hermanric and the warriors under his command,
who are still posted at that particular position on the great circle of
the blockade.

The movements of the young chieftain from place to place expressed, in
their variety and rapidity, the restlessness that was agitating his
mind.  He glanced back frequently from the warriors around him to the
remote and opposite quarter of the suburbs, occasionally directing his
eyes towards the western horizon, as if anxiously awaiting the approach
of some particular hour of the coming night. Weary at length of
pursuing occupations which evidently irritated rather than soothed his
impatience, he turned abruptly from his companions, and advancing
towards the city, paced slowly backwards and forwards over the waste
ground between the suburbs and the walls of Rome.

At intervals he still continued to examine the scene around him.  A
more dreary prospect than now met his view, whether in earth or sky,
can hardly be conceived.

The dull sunless day was fast closing, and the portentous heaven gave
promise of a stormy night. Thick, black layers of shapeless cloud hung
over the whole firmament, save at the western point; and here lay a
streak of pale, yellow light, enclosed on all sides by the firm,
ungraduated, irregular edges of the masses of gloomy vapour around it.
A deep silence hung over the whole atmosphere. The wind was voiceless
among the steady trees.  The stir and action in the being of nature and
the life of man seemed enthralled, suspended, stifled.  The air was
laden with a burdensome heat; and all things on earth, animate and
inanimate, felt the oppression that weighed on them from the higher
elements.  The people who lay gasping for breath in the famine-stricken
city, and the blades of grass that drooped languidly on the dry sward
beyond the walls, owned the enfeebling influence alike.

As the hours wore on and night stealthily and gradually advanced, a
monotonous darkness overspread, one after another, the objects
discernible to Hermanric from the solitary ground he still occupied.
Soon the great city faded into one vast, impenetrable shadow, while the
suburbs and the low country around them vanished in the thick darkness
that gathered almost perceptibly over the earth.  And now the sole
object distinctly visible was the figure of a weary sentinel, who stood
on the frowning rampart immediately above the rifted wall, and whose
drooping figure, propped upon his weapon, was indicated in hard relief
against the thin, solitary streak of light still shining in the cold
and cloudy wastes of the western sky.

But as the night still deepened, this one space of light faded,
contracted, vanished, and with it disappeared the sentinel and the line
of rampart on which he was posted.  The rule of the darkness now became
universal.  Densely and rapidly it overspread the whole city with
startling suddenness; as if the fearful destiny now working its
fulfilment in Rome had forced the external appearances of the night
into harmony with its own woe-boding nature.


Then, as the young Goth still lingered at his post of observation, the
long, low, tremulous, absorbing roll of thunder afar off became grandly
audible.  It seemed to proceed from a distance almost incalculable; to
be sounding from its cradle in the frozen north; to be journeying about
its ice-girdled chambers in the lonely poles.  It deepened rather than
interrupted the dreary, mysterious stillness of the atmosphere.  The
lightning, too, had a summer softness in its noiseless and frequent
gleam.  It was not the fierce lightning of winter, but a warm, fitful
brightness, almost fascinating in its light, rapid recurrence, tinged
with the glow of heaven, and not with the glare of hell.

There was no wind--no rain; and the air was as hushed as if it slept
over chaos in the infancy of a new creation.

Among the various objects displayed, instant by instant, by the rapid
lightning to the eyes of Hermanric, the most easily and most distinctly
visible was the broad surface of the rifted wall.  The large, loose
stones, scattered here and there at its base, and the overhanging lid
of its broad rampart, became plainly though fitfully apparent in the
brief moments of their illumination.  The lightning had played for some
time over that structure of the fortifications, and the bare ground
that stretched immediately beyond them, when the smooth prospect which
it thus gave by glimpses to view, was suddenly chequered by a flight of
birds appearing from one of the lower divisions of the wall, and
flitting uneasily to and fro at one spot before its surface.

As moment after moment the lightning continued to gleam, so the black
forms of the birds were visible to the practised eye of the
Goth--perceptible, yet evanescent, as sparks of fire or flakes of
snow--whirling confusedly and continually about the spot whence they
had evidently been startled by some unimaginable interruption.  At
length, after a lapse of some time, they vanished as suddenly as they
had appeared, with shrill notes of affright which were audible even
above the continuous rolling of the thunder; and immediately
afterwards, when the lightning alternated with the darkness, there
appeared to Hermanric, in the part of the wall where the birds had been
first disturbed, a small red gleam, like a spark of fire lodged in the
surface of the structure.  Then this was lost; a longer obscurity than
usual prevailed in the atmosphere, and when the Goth gazed eagerly
through the next succession of flashes, they showed him the momentary
and doubtful semblance of a human figure, standing erect on the stones
at the base of the wall.

Hermanric started with astonishment.  Again the lightning ceased.  In
the ardour of his anxiety to behold more, he strained his eyes with the
vain hope of penetrating the obscurity around him.  The darkness seemed
interminable.  Once again the lightning flashed brilliantly out.  He
looked eagerly towards the wall--the figure was still there.

His heart throbbed quickly within him, as he stood irresolute on the
spot he had occupied since the first peal of thunder had struck upon
his ear.  Were the light and the man--one seen but for an instant, the
other still perceptible--mere phantoms of his erring sight, dazzled by
the quick recurrence of atmospheric changes through which it had acted?
Or did he indubitably behold a human form, and had he really observed a
material light?  Some strange treachery, some dangerous mystery might
be engendering in the besieged city, which it would be his duty to
observe and unmask.  He drew his sword, and, at the risk of being
observed through the lightning, and heard during the pauses in the
thunder, by the sentinel on the wall, resolutely advanced to the very
foot of the fortifications of hostile Rome.

He heard no sound, perceived no light, observed no figure, as, after
several unsuccessful attempts to reach the place where they stood, he
at length paused at the loose stones which he knew were heaped at the
base of the wall.  The next moment he was so close to it, that he could
pass his sword-point over parts of its rugged surface.  He had scarcely
examined thus a space of more than ten yards, before his weapon
encountered a sharp, jagged edge; and a sudden presentiment assured him
instantly that he had found the spot where he had beheld the momentary
light, and that he stood on the same stone which had been occupied by
the figure of the man.


After an instant's hesitation, he was about to mount higher on the
loose stones, and examine more closely the irregularity he had just
discovered in the wall, when a vivid flash of lightning, unusually
prolonged, showed him, obstructing at scarcely a yard's distance his
onward path, the figure he had already distantly beheld from the plain
behind.

There was something inexpressibly fearful in his viewless vicinity,
during the next moment of darkness, to this silent, mysterious form, so
imperfectly shown by the lightning that quivered over its half-revealed
proportions.  Every pulse in the body of the Goth seemed to pause as he
stood, with ready weapon, looking into the gloomy darkness, and wafting
for the next flash.  It came, and displayed to him the man's fierce
eyes glaring steadily down upon his face; another gleam, and he beheld
his haggard finger placed upon his lip in token of silence; a third,
and he saw the arm of the figure pointing towards the plain behind him;
and then in the darkness that followed, a hot breath played upon his
ear, and a voice whispered to him, through a pause in the rolling of
the thunder--'Follow me.'

The next instant Hermanric felt the momentary contact of the man's
body, as with noiseless steps he passed him on the stones.  It was no
time to deliberate or to doubt.  He followed close upon the stranger's
footsteps, gaining glimpses of his dark form moving onward before,
whenever the lightning briefly illuminated the scene, until they
arrived at a clump of trees, not far distant from the houses in the
suburbs that were occupied by the Goths under his own command.

Here the stranger paused before the trunk of a tree which stood between
the city wall and himself, and drew from beneath his ragged cloak a
small lantern, carefully covered with a piece of cloth, which he now
removed, and holding the light high above his head, regarded the Goth
with a steady and anxious scrutiny.

Hermanric attempted to address him first, but the appearance of the
man, barely visible though it was by the feeble light of his lantern,
was so startling and repulsive, that the half-formed words died away on
his lips.  The face of the stranger was of a ghastly paleness; his
hollow cheeks were seamed with deep wrinkles; and his eyes glared with
an expression of ferocious suspicion.  One of his arms was covered with
old bandages, stiff with coagulated blood, and hung paralysed at his
side. The hand that held the light trembled, so that the lantern
containing it vibrated continuously in his unsteady grasp.  His limbs
were lank and shrivelled almost to deformity, and it was with evident
difficulty that he stood upright on his feet.  Every member of his body
seemed to be wasting with a gradual death, while his expression, ardent
and forbidding, was stamped with all the energy of manhood, and all the
daring of youth.

It was Ulpius!  The wall was passed!  The breach was made good!

After a protracted examination of Hermanric's countenance and attire,
the man, with an imperious expression, strangely at variance with his
faltering voice, thus addressed him:--

'You are a Goth?'

'I am,' rejoined the young chief; 'and you are--'

'A friend of the Goths,' was the quick answer.

An instant of silence followed.  The dialogue was then again begun by
the stranger.

'What brought you alone to the base of the ramparts?' he demanded, and
an expression of ungovernable apprehension shot from his eyes as he
spoke.

'I saw the appearance of a man in the gleam of the lightning,' answered
Hermanric.  'I approached it, to assure myself that my eyes had not
deluded me, to discover--'


'There is but one man of your nation who shall discover whence I came
and what I would obtain,' interrupted the stranger fiercely; 'that man
is Alaric, your king.'

Surprise, indignation, and contempt appeared in the features of the
Goth, as he listened to such a declaration from the helpless outcast
before him.  The man perceived it, and motioning him to be silent,
again addressed him.

'Listen!' cried he.  'I have that to reveal to the leader of your
forces which will stir the heart of every man in your encampment, if
you are trusted with the secret after your king has heard it from my
lips! Do you still refuse to guide me to his tent?'

Hermanric laughed scornfully.

'Look on me,' pursued the man, bending forward, and fixing his eyes
with savage earnestness upon his listener's face.  'I am alone, old,
wounded, weak,--a stranger to your nation,--a famished and a helpless
man! Should I venture into your camp--should I risk being slain for a
Roman by your comrades--should I dare the wrath of your imperious ruler
without a cause?'

He paused; and then, still keeping his eyes on the Goth, continued in
lower and more agitated tones--

'Deny me your help, I will wander through your camp till I find your
king!  Imprison me, your violence will not open my lips!  Slay me, you
will gain nothing by my death!  But aid me, and to the latest moment of
your life you will rejoice in the deed!  I have words of terrible
import for Alaric's ear,--a secret in the gaining of which I have paid
the penalty thus!'

He pointed to his wounded arm.  The solemnity of his voice, the rough
energy of his words, the stern determination of his aspect, the
darkness of the night that was round them, the rolling thunder that
seemed to join itself to their discourse, the impressive mystery of
their meeting under the city walls, all began to exert their powerful
and different influences over the mind of the Goth, changing insensibly
the sentiments at first inspired in him by the man's communications.
He hesitated, and looked round doubtfully towards the lines of the camp.

There was a long silence, which was again interrupted by the stranger.

'Guard me, chain me, mock at me if you will,' he cried, with raised
voice and flashing eyes, 'but lead me to Alaric's tent!  I swear to you
by the thunder pealing over our heads, that the words I would speak to
him will be more precious in his eyes than the brightest jewel he could
ravish from the coffers of Rome.'

Though visibly troubled and impressed, Hermanric still hesitated.

'Do you yet delay?' exclaimed the man, with contemptuous impatience.
'Stand back!  I will pass on by myself into the very heart of your
camp! I entered on my project alone--I will work its fulfilment without
help! Stand back!'

And he moved past Hermanric in the direction of the suburbs, with the
same look of fierce energy on his withered features which had marked
them so strikingly at the outset of his extraordinary interview with
the young chieftain.


The daring devotion to his purpose, the reckless toiling after a
dangerous and doubtful success, manifested in the words and actions of
one so feeble and unaided as the stranger, aroused in the Goth that
sentiment of irrepressible admiration which the union of moral and
physical courage inevitably awakens.  In addition to the incentive to
aid the man thus created, an ardent curiosity to discover his secret
filled the mind of Hermanric, and further powerfully inclined him to
conduct his determined companion into Alaric's presence--for by such
proceeding only could he hope, after the man's firm declaration that he
would communicate in the first instance to no one but the king, to
penetrate ultimately the object of his mysterious errand.  Animated,
therefore, by such motives as these, he called to the stranger to stop,
and briefly communicated to him his willingness to conduct him
instantly to the presence of the leader of the Goths.

The man intimated by a sign his readiness to accept the offer.  His
physical powers were now evidently fast failing, but he still tottered
painfully onward as they moved to the headquarters of the camp,
muttering and gesticulating to himself almost incessantly.  Once only
did he address his conductor during their progress; and then with a
startling abruptness of manner, and in tones of vehement anxiety and
suspicion, he demanded of the young Goth if he had ever examined the
surface of the city wall before that night.  Hermanric replied in the
negative; and they then proceeded in perfect silence.

Their way lay through the line of encampment to the westward, and was
imperfectly lighted by the flame of an occasional torch or the glow of
a distant watch-fire.  The thunder had diminished in frequency, but had
increased in volume; faint breaths of wind soared up fitfully from the
west, and already a few raindrops fell slowly to the thirsty earth.
The warriors not actually on duty at the different posts of observation
had retired to the shelter of their tents; none of the thousand idlers
and attendants attached to the great army appeared at their usual
haunts; even the few voices that were audible sounded distant and low.
The night-scene here, among the ranks of the invaders of Italy, was as
gloomy and repelling as on the solitary plains before the walls of Rome.

Ere long the stranger perceived that they had reached a part of the
camp more thickly peopled, more carefully illuminated, more strongly
fortified, than that through which they had already passed; and the
liquid, rushing sound of the waters of the rapid Tiber now caught his
suspicious and attentive ear.  They still moved onward a few yards; and
then paused suddenly before a tent, immediately surrounded by many
others, and occupied at all its approaches by groups of richly-armed
warriors. Here Hermanric stopped an instant to parley with the
sentinel, who, after a short delay, raised the outer covering of the
entrance to the tent, and the moment after the Roman adventurer beheld
himself standing by his conductor's side in the presence of the Gothic
king.

The interior of Alaric's tent was lined with skins, and illuminated by
one small lamp, fastened to the centre pole that supported its roof.
The only articles of furniture in the place were some bundles of furs
flung down loosely on the ground, and a large, rudely-carved wooden
chest, on which stood a polished human skull, hollowed into a sort of
clumsy wine-cup.  A thoroughly Gothic ruggedness of aspect, a stately
Northern simplicity prevailed over the spacious tent, and was indicated
not merely in its thick shadows, its calm lights, and its freedom from
pomp and glitter, but even in the appearance and employment of its
remarkable occupant.


Alaric was seated alone on the wooden chest already described,
contemplating with bent brow and abstracted gaze some old Runic
characters, traced upon the carved surface of a brass and silver
shield, full five feet high, which rested against the side of the tent.
The light of the lamp falling upon the polished surface of the
weapon--rendered doubly bright by the dark skins behind it--was
reflected back upon the figure of the Goth chief.  It glowed upon his
ample cuirass; it revealed his firm lips, slightly curled by an
expression of scornful triumph; it displayed the grand, muscular
formation of his arm, which rested--clothed in tightly-fitting
leather--upon his knee; it partly brightened over his short, light
hair, and glittered steadily in his fixed, thoughtful, manly eyes,
which were just perceptible beneath the partial shadow of his
contracted brow; while it left the lower part of his body and his right
hand, which was supported on the head of a huge, shaggy dog couching at
his side, shadowed almost completely by the thick skins heaped
confusedly against the sides of the wooden chest.  He was so completely
absorbed in the contemplation of the Runic characters, traced among the
carved figures on his immense shield, that he did not notice the entry
of Hermanric and the stranger until the growl of the watchful dog
suddenly disturbed him in his occupation.  He looked up instantly, his
quick, penetrating glance dwelling for a moment on the young chieftain,
and then resting steadily and inquiringly on his companion's feeble and
mutilated form.

Accustomed to the military brevity and promptitude exacted by his
commander in all communications addressed to him by his inferiors,
Hermanric, without waiting to be interrogated or attempting to preface
or excuse his narrative, shortly related the conversation that had
taken place between the stranger and himself on the plain near the
Pincian Gate; and then waited respectfully to receive the commendation
or incur the rebuke of the king, as the chance of the moment might
happen to decide.

After again fixing his eyes in severe scrutiny on the person of the
Roman, Alaric spoke to the young warrior in the Gothic language thus:--

'Leave the man with me--return to your post, and there await whatever
commands it may be necessary that I should despatch to you to-night.'

Hermanric immediately departed.  Then, addressing the stranger for the
first time, and speaking in the Latin language, the Gothic leader
briefly and significantly intimated to his unknown visitant that they
were now alone.

The man's parched lips moved, opened, quivered; his wild, hollow eyes
brightened till they absolutely gleamed, but he seemed incapable of
uttering a word; his features became horribly convulsed, the foam
gathered about his lips, he staggered forward and would have fallen to
the ground, had not the king instantly caught him in his strong grasp,
and placed him on the wooden chest that he had hitherto occupied
himself.

'Can a starving Roman have escaped from the beleaguered city?' muttered
Alaric, as he took the skull cup, and poured some of the wine it
contained down the stranger's throat.

The liquor was immediately successful in restoring composure to the
man's features and consciousness to his mind.  He raised himself from
the seat, dashed off the cold perspiration that overspread his
forehead, and stood upright before the king--the solitary, powerless
old man before the vigorous lord of thousands, in the midst of his
warriors--without a tremor in his steady eye or a prayer for protection
on his haughty lip.

'I, a Roman,' he began, 'come from Rome, against which the invader wars
with the weapon of famine, to deliver the city, her people, her
palaces, and her treasures into the hands of Alaric the Goth.'

The king started, looked on the speaker for a moment, and then turned
from him in impatience and contempt.

'I lie not,' pursued the enthusiast, with a calm dignity that affected
even the hardy sensibilities of the Gothic hero.  'Eye me again!  Could
I come starved, shrivelled, withered thus from any place but Rome?
Since I quitted the city an hour has hardly passed, and by the way that
I left it the forces of the Goths may enter it to-night.'

'The proof of the harvest is in the quantity of the grain, not in the
tongue of the husbandman.  Show me your open gates, and I will believe
that you have spoken truth,' retorted the king, with a rough laugh.

'I betray the city,' resumed the man sternly, 'but on one condition;
grant it me, and--'

'I will grant you your life,' interrupted Alaric haughtily.


'My life!' cried the Roman, and his shrunken form seemed to expand, and
his tremulous voice to grow firm and steady in the very bitterness of
his contempt, as he spoke.  'My life!  I ask it not of your power!  The
wreck of my body is scarce strong enough to preserve it to me a single
day!  I  have no home, no loves, no friends, no possessions!  I live in
Rome a solitary in the midst of the multitude, a pagan in a city of
apostates!  What is my life to me?  I cherish it but for the service of
the gods, whose instruments of vengeance against the nation that has
denied them I would make you and your hosts!  If you slay me, it is a
sign to me from them that I am worthless in their cause. I shall die
content.'

He ceased.  The king's manner, as he listened to him, gradually lost
the bluntness and carelessness that had hitherto characterised it, and
assumed an attention and a seriousness more in accordance with his high
station and important responsibilities.  He began to regard the
stranger as no common renegade, no ordinary spy, no shallow impostor,
who might be driven from his tent with disdain; but as a man important
enough to be heard, and ambitious enough to be distrusted.
Accordingly, he resumed the seat from which he had risen during the
interview, and calmly desired his new ally to explain the condition, on
the granting of which depended the promised betrayal of the city of
Rome.

The pain-worn and despondent features of Ulpius became animated by a
glow of triumph as he heard the sudden mildness and moderation of the
king's demand; he raised his head proudly, and advanced a few steps, as
he thus loudly and abruptly resumed:--

'Assure to me the overthrow of the Christian churches, the
extermination of the Christian priests, and the universal revival of
the worship of the gods, and this night shall make you master of the
chief city of the empire you are labouring to subvert!'

The boldness, the comprehensiveness, the insanity of wickedness
displayed in such a proposition, and emanating from such a source, so
astounded the mind of Alaric, as to deprive him for the moment of
speech.  The stranger, perceiving his temporary inability to answer
him, broke the silence which ensued and continued--

'Is my condition a hard one?  A conqueror is all-powerful; he can
overthrow the worship, as he can overthrow the government of a nation.
What matters it to you, while empire, renown, and treasure are yours,
what deities the people adore?  Is it a great price to pay for an easy
conquest, to make a change which threatens neither your power, your
fame, nor your wealth?  Do you marvel that I  desire from you such a
revolution as this?  I was born for the gods, in their service I
inherited rank and renown, for their cause I have suffered degradation
and woe, for their restoration I will plot, combat, die!  Assure me
then by oath, that with a new rule you will erect our ancient worship,
and through my secret inlet to the city I will introduce men enough of
the Goths to murder with security the sentinels at the guard-houses,
and open the gates of Rome to the numbers of your whole invading
forces. Think not to despise the aid of a man unprotected and unknown!
The citizens will never yield to your blockade; you shrink from risking
the dangers of an assault; the legions of Ravenna are reported on their
way hitherward.  Outcast as I am, I tell it to you here, in the midst
of your camp--your speediest assurance of success rests on my discovery
and on me!'

The king started suddenly from his seat.  'What fool or madman!' he
cried, fixing his eyes in furious scorn and indignation on the
stranger's face, 'prates to me about the legions of Ravenna and the
dangers of an assault!  Think you, renegade, that your city could have
resisted me had I chosen to storm it on the first day when I encamped
before its walls?  Know you that your effeminate soldiery have laid
aside the armour of their ancestors, because their puny bodies are too
feeble to bear its weight, and that the half of my army here trebles
the whole number of the guards of Rome?  Now, while you stand before
me, I have but to command, and the city shall be annihilated with fire
and sword, without the aid of one of the herd of traitors cowering
beneath the shelter of its ill-defended walls!'


As Alaric spoke thus, some invisible agency seemed to crush, body and
mind, the lost wretch whom he addressed.  The shock of such an answer
as he now heard seemed to strike him idiotic, as a flash of lightning
strikes with blindness.  He regarded the king with a bewildered stare,
waving his hand tremulously backwards and forwards before his face, as
if to clear some imaginary darkness off his eyes; then his arm fell
helpless by his side, his head drooped upon his breast, and he moaned
out in low, vacant tones, 'The restoration of the gods--that is the
condition of conquest--the restoration of the gods!'

'I come not hither to be the tool of a frantic and forgotten
priesthood,' cried Alaric disdainfully.  'Wherever I meet with your
accursed idols I will melt them down into armour for my warriors and
shoes for my horses; I will turn your temples into granaries and cut
your images of wood into billets for the watchfires of my hosts!'

'Slay me and be silent!' groaned the man, staggering back against the
side of the tent, and shrinking under the merciless words of the Goth
like a slave under the lash.

'I leave the shedding of such blood as yours to your fellow Romans,'
answered the king; 'they alone are worthy of the deed.'

No syllable of reply now escaped the stranger's lips, and after an
interval of silence Alaric resumed, in tones divested of their former
fiery irritation, and marked by a solemn earnestness that conferred
irresistible dignity and force on every word that he uttered.

'Behold the characters engraven there!' said he, pointing to the
shield; 'they trace the curse denounced by Odin against the great
oppressor, Rome!  Once these words made part of the worship of our
fathers; the worship has long since vanished, but the words remain;
they seal the eternal hatred of the people of the North to the people
of the South; they contain the spirit of the great destiny that has
brought me to the walls of Rome.  Citizen of a fallen empire, the
measure of your crimes is full!  The voice of a new nation calls
through me for the freedom of the earth, which was made for man, and
not for Romans!  The rule that your ancestors won by strength their
posterity shall no longer keep by fraud.  For two hundred years, hollow
and unlasting truces have alternated with long and bloody wars between
your people and mine. Remembering this, remembering the wrongs of the
Goths in their settlements in Thrace, the murder of the Gothic youths
in the towns of Asia, the massacre of the Gothic hostages in Aquileia,
I come--chosen by the supernatural decrees of Heaven--to assure the
freedom and satisfy the wrath of my nation, by humbling at its feet the
power of tyrannic Rome!  It is not for battle and bloodshed that I am
encamped before yonder walls.  It is to crush to the earth, by famine
and woe, the pride of your people and the spirit of your rulers; to
tear from you your hidden wealth, and to strip you of your boasted
honour; to overthrow by oppression the oppressors of the world; to deny
you the glories of a resistance, and to impose on you the shame of a
submission.  It is for this that I now abstain from storming your city,
to encircle it with an immovable blockade!'

As the declaration of his great mission burst thus from the lips of the
Gothic king, the spirit of his lofty ambition seemed to diffuse itself
over his outward form.  His noble stature, his fine proportions, his
commanding features, became invested with a simple, primeval grandeur.
Contrasted as he now was with the shrunken figure of the spirit-broken
stranger, he looked almost sublime.


A succession of protracted shuddering ran through the Pagan's frame,
but he neither wept nor spoke.  The unavailing defence of the Temple of
Serapis, the defeated revolution at Alexandria, and the abortive
intrigue with Vetranio, were now rising on his memory, to heighten the
horror of his present and worst overthrow.  Every circumstance
connected with his desperate passage through the rifted wall revived,
fearfully vivid, on his mind.  He remembered all the emotions of his
first night's labour in the darkness, all the miseries of his second
night's torture under the fallen brickwork, all the woe, danger, and
despondency that accompanied his subsequent toil--persevered in under
the obstructions of a famine-weakened body and a helpless arm--until he
passed, in delusive triumph, the last of the hindrances in the
long-laboured breach.  One after another these banished recollections
returned to his memory as he listened to Alaric's rebuking
words--reviving past infirmities, opening old wounds, inflicting new
lacerations.  But, saving the shudderings that still shook his body, no
outward witness betrayed the inward torment that assailed him.  It was
too strong for human words, too terrible for human sympathy;--he
suffered it in brute silence. Monstrous as was his plot, the moral
punishment of its attempted consummation was severe enough to be worthy
of the projected crime.

After watching the man for a few minutes more, with a glance of
pitiless disdain, Alaric summoned one of the warriors in attendance;
and, having previously commanded him to pass the word to the sentinels,
authorising the stranger's free passage through the encampment, he then
turned, and, for the last time, addressed him as follows:--

'Return to Rome, through the hole whence, reptile-like, you
emerged!--and feed your starving citizens with the words you have heard
in the barbarian's tent!'

The guard approached, led him from the presence of the king, issued the
necessary directions to the sentinels, and left him to himself.  Once
he raised his eyes in despairing appeal to the heaven that frowned over
his head; but still, no word, or tear, or groan, escaped him.  He moved
slowly on through the thick darkness; and turning his back on the city,
passed, careless whither he strayed, into the streets of the desolate
and dispeopled suburbs.



CHAPTER 16.

LOVE MEETINGS.

Who that has looked on a threatening and tempestuous sky, has not felt
the pleasure of discovering unexpectedly a small spot of serene blue,
still shining among the stormy clouds?  The more unwillingly the eye
has wandered over the gloomy expanse of the rest of the firmament, the
more gladly does it finally rest on the little oasis of light which
meets at length its weary gaze, and which, when it was dispersed over
the whole heaven, was perhaps only briefly regarded with a careless
glance. Contrasted with the dark and mournful hues around it, even that
small spot of blue gradually acquires the power of investing the wider
and sadder prospect with a certain interest and animation that it did
not before possess--until the mind recognises in the surrounding
atmosphere of storm an object adding variety to the view--a spectacle
whose mournfulness may interest as well as repel.

Was it with sensations resembling these (applied, however, rather to
the mind than to the eye) that the reader perused those pages devoted
to Hermanric and Antonina?  Does the happiness there described now
appear to him to beam through the stormy progress of the narrative as
the spot of blue beams through the gathering clouds?  Did that small
prospect of brightness present itself, at the time, like a garden of
repose amid the waste of fierce emotions which encompassed it?  Did it
encourage him, when contrasted with what had gone before, to enter on
the field of gloomier interest which was to follow?  If, indeed, it has
thus affected him, if he can still remember the scene at the farm-house
beyond the suburbs with emotions such as these, he will not now be
unwilling to turn again for a moment from the gathering clouds to the
spot of blue,--he will not deny us an instant's digression from Ulpius
and the city of famine to Antonina and the lonely plains.

During the period that has elapsed since we left her, Antonina has
remained secure in her solitude, happy in her well-chosen concealment.
The few straggling Goths who at rare intervals appeared in the
neighbourhood of her sanctuary never intruded on its peaceful limits.
The sight of the ravaged fields and emptied granaries of the deserted
little property sufficed invariably to turn their marauding steps in
other directions.  Day by day ran smoothly and swiftly onwards for the
gentle usurper of the abandoned farm-house.  In the narrow round of its
gardens and protecting woods was comprised for her the whole circle of
the pleasures and occupations of her new life.


The simple stores left in the house, the fruits and vegetables to be
gathered in the garden, sufficed amply for her support.  The pastoral
solitude of the place had in it a quiet, dreamy fascination, a novelty,
an unwearying charm, after the austere loneliness to which her former
existence had been subjected in Rome.  And when evening came, and the
sun began to burnish the tops of the western tress, then, after the
calm emotions of the solitary day, came the hour of absorbing cares and
happy expectations--ever the same, yet ever delighting and ever new.
Then the rude shutters were carefully closed; the open door was shut
and barred; the small light--now invisible to the world without--was
joyfully kindled; and then, the mistress and author of these
preparations resigned herself to await, with pleased anxiety, the
approach of the guest for whose welcome they were designed.

And never did she expect the arrival of that treasured companion in
vain.  Hermanric remembered his promise to repair constantly to the
farm-house, and performed it with all the constancy of love and all the
enthusiasm of youth.  When the sentinels under his command were
arranged in their order of watching for the night, and the trust
reposed in him by his superiors exempted his actions from
superintendence during the hours of darkness that followed, he left the
camp, passed through the desolate suburbs, and gained the dwelling
where the young Roman awaited him--returning before daybreak to receive
the communications regularly addressed to him, at that hour, by his
inferior in the command.

Thus, false to his nation, yet true to the new Egeria of his thoughts
and actions--traitor to the requirements of vengeance and war, yet
faithful to the interests of tranquility and love--did he seek, night
after night, Antonina's presence.  His passion, though it denied him to
his warrior duties, wrought not deteriorating change in his
disposition. All that it altered in him it altered nobly.  It varied
and exalted his rude emotions, for it was inspired, not alone by the
beauty and youth that he saw, but by the pure thoughts, the artless
eloquence that he heard.  And she--the forsaken daughter, the source
whence the Northern warrior derived those new and higher sensations
that had never animated him until now--regarded her protector, her
first friend and companion, as her first love, with a devotion which,
in its mingled and exalted nature, may be imagined by the mind, but can
be but imperfectly depicted by the pen.  It was a devotion created of
innocence and gratitude, of joy and sorrow, of apprehension and hope.
It was too fresh, too unworldly to own any upbraidings of artificial
shame, any self-reproaches of artificial propriety.  It resembled in
its essence, though not in its application, the devotion of the first
daughters of the Fall to their brother-lords.

But it is now time that we return to the course of our narrative;
although, ere we again enter on the stirring and rapid present, it will
be necessary for a moment more to look back in another direction to the
eventful past.

But it is not on peace, beauty, and pleasure that our observation now
fixes itself. It is to anger, disease, and crime--to the unappeasable
and unwomanly Goisvintha, that we now revert.

Since the day when the violence of her conflicting emotions had
deprived her of consciousness, at the moment of her decisive triumph
over the scruples of Hermanric and the destiny of Antonina, a raging
fever had visited on her some part of those bitter sufferings that she
would fain have inflicted on others.  Part of the time she lay in a
raving delirium; part of the time in helpless exhaustion; but she never
forgot, whatever the form assumed by her disease, the desperate purpose
in the pursuit of which she had first incurred it.  Slowly and
doubtfully her vigour at length returned to her, and with it
strengthened and increased the fierce ambition of vengeance that
absorbed her lightest thoughts and governed her most careless actions.


Report informed her of the new position, on the line of blockade, on
which Hermanric was posted, and only enumerated as the companions of
his sojourn the warriors sent thither under his command. But, though
thus persuaded of the separation of Antonina and the Goth, her
ignorance of the girl's fate rankled unintermittingly in her savage
heart.  Doubtful whether she had permanently reclaimed Hermanric to the
interests of vengeance and bloodshed; vaguely suspecting that he might
have informed himself in her absence of Antonina's place of refuge or
direction of flight; still resolutely bent on securing the death of her
victim, wherever she might have strayed, she awaited with trembling
eagerness that day of restoration to available activity and strength
which would enable her to resume her influence over the Goth, and her
machinations against the safety of the fugitive girl. The time of her
final and long-expected recovery, was the very day preceding the stormy
night we have already described, and her first employment of her
renewed energy was to send word to the young Goth of her intention of
seeking him at his encampment ere the evening closed.

It was this intimation which caused the inquietude mentioned as
characteristic of the manner of Hermanric at the commencement of the
preceding chapter.  The evening there described was the first that saw
him deprived, through the threatened visit of Goisvintha, of the
anticipation of repairing to Antonina, as had been his wont, under
cover of the night; for to slight his kinswoman's ominous message was
to risk the most fatal of discoveries.  Trusting to the delusive
security of her sickness, he had hitherto banished the unwelcome
remembrance of her existence from his thoughts.  But, now that she was
once more capable of exertion and of crime, he felt that if he would
preserve the secret of Antonina's hiding-place and the security of
Antonina's life, he must remain to oppose force to force and stratagem
to stratagem, when Goisvintha sought him at his post, even at the risk
of inflicting, by his absence from the farm-house, all the pangs of
anxiety and apprehension on the lonely girl.

Absorbed in such reflections as these, longing to depart, yet
determined to remain, he impatiently awaited Goisvintha's approach,
until the rising of the storm with its mysterious and all-engrossing
train of events forced his thoughts and actions into a new channel.
When, however, his interviews with the stranger and the Gothic king
were past, and he had returned as he had been bidden to his appointed
sojourn in the camp, his old anxieties, displaced but not destroyed,
resumed their influence over him.  He demanded eagerly of his comrades
if Goisvintha had arrived in his absence, and received the same answer
in the negative from each.

As he now listened to the melancholy rising of the wind and the
increasing loudness of the thunder, to the shrill cries of the distant
night-birds hurrying to shelter, emotions of mournfulness and awe
possessed themselves of his heart.  He now wondered that any events,
however startling, however appalling, should have had the power to turn
his mind for a moment from the dreary contemplations that had engaged
it at the close of day.  He thought of Antonina, solitary and helpless,
listening to the tempest in affright, and watching vainly for his
long-delayed approach.  His fancy arrayed before him dangers, plots,
and crimes, robed in all the horrible exaggerations of a dream.  Even
the quick, monotonous dripping of the rain-drops outside aroused within
him dark and indefinable forebodings of ill.  The passion that had
hitherto created for him new pleasures was now fulfilling the other
half of its earthly mission, and causing him new pains.

As the storm strengthened, as the darkness lowered deeper and deeper,
so did his inquietude increase, until at length it mastered the last
feeble resistance of his wavering firmness.  Persuading himself that,
after having delayed so long, Goisvintha would now refrain from seeking
him until the morrow, and that all communications from Alaric, had they
been despatched, would have reached him ere this; unable any longer to
combat his anxiety for the safety of Antonina; determined to risk the
worst possibilities rather than be absent at such a time of tempest and
peril from the farm-house, he made a last visit to the stations of the
watchful sentinels, and quitted the camp for the night.



CHAPTER 17.

THE HUNS.

More than an hour after Hermanric had left the encampment, a man
hurriedly entered the house set apart for the young chieftain's
occupation.  He made no attempt to kindle either light or fire, but sat
down in the principal apartment, occasionally whispering to himself in
a strange and barbarous tongue.


He had remained but a short time in possession of his comfortless
solitude, when he was intruded on by a camp-follower, bearing a small
lamp, and followed closely by a woman, who, as he started up and
confronted her, announced herself as Hermanric's kinswoman, and eagerly
demanded an interview with the Goth.

Haggard and ghastly though it was from recent suffering and long
agitation, the countenance of Goisvintha (for it was she) appeared
absolutely attractive as it was now opposed by the lamp-light to the
face and figure of the individual she addressed.  A flat nose, a
swarthy complexion, long, coarse, tangled locks of deep black hair, a
beardless, retreating chin, and small, savage, sunken eyes, gave a
character almost bestial to this man's physiognomy.  His broad, brawny
shoulders overhung a form that was as low in stature as it was athletic
in build; you looked on him and saw the sinews of a giant strung in the
body of a dwarf.  And yet this deformed Hercules was no solitary error
of Nature--no extraordinary exception to his fellow-beings, but the
actual type of a whole race, stunted and repulsive as himself.  He was
a Hun.

This savage people, the terror even of their barbarous neighbours,
living without government, laws, or religion, possessed but one feeling
in common with the human race--the instinct of war.  Their historical
career may be said to have begun with their early conquests in China,
and to have proceeded in their first victories over the Goths, who
regarded them as demons, and fled at their approach.  The hostilities
thus commenced between the two nations were at length suspended by the
temporary alliance of the conquered people with the empire, and
subsequently ceased in the gradual fusion of the interests of each in
one animating spirit--detestation of Rome.

By this bond of brotherhood, the Goths and the Huns became publicly
united, though still privately at enmity--for the one nation remembered
its former defeats as vividly as the other remembered its former
victories.  With various disasters, dissensions, and successes, they
ran their career of battle and rapine, sometimes separate, sometimes
together, until the period of our romance, when Alaric's besieging
forces numbered among the ranks of their barbarian auxiliaries a body
of Huns, who, unwillingly admitted to the title of Gothic allies, were
dispersed about the army in subordinate stations, and of whom the
individual above described was one of those contemptuously favoured by
promotion to an inferior command, under Hermanric, as a Gothic chief.

An expression of aversion, but not of terror, passed over Goisvintha's
worn features as she approached the barbarian, and repeated her desire
to be conducted to Hermanric's presence.  For the second time, however,
the man gave her no answer.  He burst into a shrill, short laugh, and
shook his huge shoulders in clumsy derision.

The woman's cheek reddened for an instant, and then turned again to
livid paleness as she thus resumed--

'I came not hither to be mocked by a barbarian, but to be welcomed by a
Goth!  Again I ask you, where is my kinsman, Hermanric?'

'Gone!' cried the Hun.  And his laughter grew more wild and discordant
as he spoke.

A sudden tremor ran through Goisvintha's frame as she marked the manner
of the barbarian and heard his reply.  Repressing with difficulty her
anger and agitation, she continued, with apprehension in her eyes and
entreaty in her tones--

'Whither has he gone?  Wherefore has he departed?  I know that the hour
I appointed for our meeting here has long passed; but I have suffered a
sickness of many weeks, and when, at evening, I prepared to set forth,
my banished infirmities seemed suddenly to return to me again.  I was
borne to my bed.  But, though the woman who succoured me bid me remain
and repose, I found strength in the night to escape them, and through
storm and darkness to come hither alone--for I was determined, though I
should perish for it, to seek the presence of Hermanric, as I had
promised by my messengers.  You, that are the companion of his watch,
must know whither he is gone.  Go to him, and tell him what I have
spoken.  I will await his return!'


'His business is secret,' sneered the Hun.  'He has departed, but
without telling me whither.  How should I, that am a barbarian, know
the whereabouts of an illustrious Goth?  It is not for me to know his
actions, but to obey his words!'

'Jeer not about your obedience,' returned Goisvintha with breathless
eagerness.  'I say to you again, you know whither he is gone, and you
must tell me for what he has departed.  You obey him--there is money to
make you obey me!'

'When I said his business was secret, I lied not,' said the Hun,
picking up with avidity the coins she flung to him--'but he has not
kept it secret from me!  The Huns are cunning!  Aha, ugly and cunning!'

Suspicion, the only refined emotion in a criminal heart, half
discovered to Goisvintha, at this moment, the intelligence that was yet
to be communicated.  No word, however, escaped her, while she signed
the barbarian to proceed.

'He has gone to a farm-house on the plains beyond the suburbs behind
us. He will not return till daybreak,' continued the Hun, tossing his
money carelessly in his great, horny hands.

'Did you see him go?' gasped the woman.

'I tracked him to the house,' returned the barbarian.  'For many nights
I watched and suspected him--to-night I saw him depart.  It is but a
short time since I returned from following him.  The darkness did not
delude me; the place is on the high-road from the suburbs--the first
by-path to the westward leads to its garden gate.  I know it!  I have
discovered his secret!  I am more cunning than he!'

'For what did he seek the farm-house at night?' demanded Goisvintha
after an interval, during which she appeared to be silently fixing the
man's last speech in her memory; 'are you cunning enough to tell me
that?'

'For what do men venture their safety and their lives, their money and
their renown?' laughed the barbarian.  'They venture them for women!
There is a girl at the farm-house; I saw her at the door when the chief
went in!'

He paused; but Goisvintha made no answer.  Remembering that she was
descended from a race of women who slew their wounded husbands,
brothers, and sons with their own hands when they sought them after
battle dishonoured by a defeat; remembering that the fire of the old
ferocity of such ancestors as these still burnt at her heart;
remembering all that she had hoped from Hermanric, and had plotted
against Antonina; estimating in all its importance the shock of the
intelligence she now received, we are alike unwilling and unable to
describe her emotions at this moment.  For some time the stillness in
the room was interrupted by no sounds but the rolling of the thunder
without, the quick, convulsive respiration of Goisvintha, and the
clinking of the money which the Hun still continued to toss
mechanically from hand to hand.

'I shall reap good harvest of gold and silver after to-night's work,'
pursued the barbarian, suddenly breaking the silence.  'You have given
me money to speak--when the chief returns and hears that I have
discovered him, he will give me money to be silent.  I shall drink
to-morrow with the best men in the army, Hun though I am!'

He returned to his seat as he ceased, and began beating in monotonous
measure, with one of his pieces of money on the blade of his sword,
some chorus of a favourite drinking song; while Goisvintha, standing
pale and breathless near the door of the chamber, looked down on him
with fixed, vacant eyes.  At length a deep sigh broke from her; her
hands involuntarily clenched themselves at her side; her lips moved
with a bitter smile; then, without addressing another word to the Hun,
she turned, and softly and stealthily quitted the room.


The instant she was gone, a sudden change arose in the barbarian's
manner.  He started from his seat, a scowl of savage hatred and triumph
appeared on his shaggy brows, and he paced to and fro through the
chamber like a wild beast in his cage.  'I shall tear him from the
pinnacle of his power at last!' he whispered fiercely to himself.  'For
what I have told her this night, his kinswoman will hate him--I knew it
while she spoke!  For his desertion of his post, Alaric may dishonour
him, may banish him, may hang him!  His fate is at my mercy; I shall
rid myself nobly of him and his command! More than all the rest of his
nation I loathe this Goth!  I will be by when they drag him to the
tree, and taunt him with his shame, as he has taunted me with my
deformity.' Here he paused to laugh in complacent approval of his
project, quickening his steps and hugging himself joyfully in the
barbarous exhilaration of his triumph.

His secret meditations had thus occupied him for some time longer, when
the sound of a footstep was audible outside the door.  He recognised it
instantly, and called softly to the person without to approach.  At the
signal of his voice a man entered--less athletic in build, but in
deformity the very counterpart of himself.  The following discourse was
then immediately held between the two Huns, the new-comer beginning it
thus:--

'Have you tracked him to the door?'

'To the very threshold.'

'Then his downfall is assured!  I have seen Alaric.'

'We shall trample him under our feet!--this boy, who has been set over
us that are his elders, because he is a Goth and we are Huns!  But what
of Alaric?  How did you gain his ear?'

'The Goths round his tent scoffed at me as a savage, and swore that I
was begotten between a demon and a witch.  But I remembered the time
when these boasters fled from their settlements; when our tribes
mounted their black steeds and hunted them like beasts!  Aha, their
very lips were pale with fear in those days.'

'Speak of Alaric--our time is short,' interrupted the other fiercely.

'I answered not a word to their taunts,' resumed his companion, 'but I
called out loudly that I was a Gothic ally, that I brought messages to
Alaric, and that I had the privilege of audience like the rest. My
voice reached the ears of the king:  he looked forth from his tent, and
beckoned me in.  I saw his hatred of my nation lowering in his eye as
we looked on one another, but I spoke with submission and in a soft
voice. I told him how his chieftain whom he had set over us secretly
deserted his post; I told him how we had seen his favoured warrior for
many nights journeying towards the suburbs;  how on this night, as on
others before, he had stolen from the encampment, and how you had gone
forth to track him to his lurking-place.'

'Was the tyrant angered?'

'His cheeks reddened, and his eyes flashed, and his fingers trembled
round the hilt of his sword while I spoke!  When I ceased he answered
me that I lied.  He cursed me for an infidel Hun who had slandered a
Christian chieftain.  He threatened me with hanging!  I cried to him to
send messengers to our quarters to prove the truth ere he slew me.  He
commanded a warrior to return hither with me.  When we arrived, the
most Christian chieftain was nowhere to be beheld--none knew whither he
had gone!  We turned back again to the tent of the king; his warrior,
whom he honoured, spoke the same words to him as the Hun whom he
despised. Then the wrath of Alaric rose.  "This very night," he cried,
"did I with my own lips direct him to await my commands with vigilance
at his appointed post!  I would visit such disobedience with punishment
on my own son!  Go, take with you others of your troop--your comrade
who has tracked him will guide you to his hiding-place--bring him
prisoner into my tent!"  Such were his words!  Our companions wait us
without--lest he should escape let us depart without delay.'


'And if he should resist us,' cried the other, leading the way eagerly
towards the door; 'what said the king if he should resist us?'

'Slay him with your own hands.'



CHAPTER 18.

THE FARM-HOUSE.

As the night still advanced, so did the storm increase.  On the plains
in the open country its violence was most apparent.  Here no living
voices jarred with the dreary music of the elements; no flaming torches
opposed the murky darkness or imitated the glaring lightning.  The
thunder pursued uninterruptedly its tempest symphony, and the fierce
wind joined it, swelling into wild harmony when it rushed through the
trees, as if in their waving branches it struck the chords of a mighty
harp.

In the small chamber of the farm-house sat together Hermanric and
Antonina, listening in speechless attention to the increasing tumult of
the storm.

The room and its occupants were imperfectly illuminated by the flame of
a smouldering wood fire. The little earthenware lamp hung from its
usual place in the ceiling, but its oil was exhausted and its light was
extinct.  An alabaster vase of fruit lay broken by the side of the
table, from which it had fallen unnoticed to the floor.  No other
articles of ornament appeared in the apartment.  Hermanric's downcast
eyes and melancholy, unchanging expressions betrayed the gloomy
abstraction in which he was absorbed.  With one hand clasped in his,
and the other resting with her head on his shoulder, Antonina listened
attentively to the alternate rising and falling of the wind.  Her
beauty had grown fresher and more woman-like during her sojourn at the
farm-house.  Cheerfulness and hope seemed to have gained at length all
the share in her being assigned to them by nature at her birth.  Even
at this moment of tempest and darkness there was more of wonder and awe
than of agitation and affright in her expression, as she sat
hearkening, with flushed cheek and brightened eye, to the progress of
the nocturnal storm.

Thus engrossed by their thoughts, Hermanric and Antonina remained
silent in their little retreat, until the reveries of both were
suddenly interrupted by the snapping asunder of the bar of wood which
secured the door of the room, the stress of which, as it bent under the
repeated shocks of the wind, the rotten spar was too weak to sustain
any longer. There was something inexpressibly desolate in the flood of
rain, wind, and darkness that seemed instantly to pour into the chamber
through the open door, as it flew back violently on its frail hinges.
Antonina changed colour, and shuddered involuntarily, as Hermanric
hastily rose and closed the door again, by detaching its rude latch
from the sling which held it when not wanted for use.  He looked round
the room as he did so for some substitute for the broken bar, but
nothing that was fit for the purpose immediately met his eye, and he
muttered to himself as he returned impatiently to his seat:  'While we
are here to watch it the latch is enough; it is new and strong.'

He seemed on the point of again relapsing into his former gloom, when
the voice of Antonina arrested his attention, and aroused him for the
moment from his thoughts.

'Is it in the power of the tempest to make you, a warrior of a race of
heroes, thus sorrowful and sad?' she asked, in accents of gentle
reproach.  'Even I, as I look on these walls that are so eloquent of my
happiness, and sit by you whose presence makes that happiness, can
listen to the raging storm, and feel no heaviness over my heart!  What
is there to either of us in the tempest that should oppress us with
gloom?  Does not the thunder come from the same heaven as the sunshine
of the summer day? You are so young, so generous, so brave,--you have
loved, and pitied, and succoured me,--why should the night language of
the sky cast such sorrow and such silence over you?'

'It is not from sorrow that I am silent,' replied Hermanric, with a
constrained smile, 'but from weariness with much toil in the camp.'


He stifled a sigh as he spoke.  His head returned to its old downcast
position.  The struggle between his assumed carelessness and his real
inquietude was evidently unequal.  As she looked fixedly on him, with
the vigilant eye of affection, the girl's countenance saddened with
his. She nestled closer to his side and resumed the discourse in
anxious and entreating tones.

'It is haply the strife between our two nations which has separated us
already, and may separate us again, that thus oppresses you,' said she;
'but think, as I do, of the peace that must come, and not of the
warfare that now is.  Think of the pleasures of our past days, and of
the happiness of our present moments,--thus united, thus living,
loving, hoping for each other; and, like me, you will doubt not of the
future that is in preparation for us both!  The season of tranquillity
may return with the season of spring.  The serene heaven will then be
reflected on a serene country and a happy people; and in those days of
sunshine and peace, will any hearts among all the glad population be
more joyful than ours?'

She paused a moment.  Some sudden thought or recollection heightened
her colour and caused her to hesitate ere she proceeded.  She was about
at length to continue, when a peal of thunder, louder than any which
had preceded it, burst threateningly over the house and drowned the
first accents of her voice.  The wind moaned loudly, the rain splashed
against the door, the latch rattled long and sharply in its socket.
Once more Hermanric rose from his seat, and approaching the fire,
placed a fresh log of wood upon the dying embers.  His dejection seemed
now to communicate itself to Antonina, and as he reseated himself by
her side, she did not address him again.

Thoughts, dreary and appalling beyond any that had occupied it before,
were rising in the mind of the Goth.  His inquietude at the encampment
in the suburbs was tranquillity itself compared to the gloom which now
oppressed him.  All the evaded dues of his nation, his family, and his
calling; all the suppressed recollections of the martial occupation he
had slighted, and the martial enmities he had disowned, now revived
avengingly in his memory.  Yet, vivid as these remembrances were, they
weakened none of those feelings of passionate devotion to Antonina by
which their influence within him had hitherto been overcome.  They
existed with them--the old recollections with the new emotions--the
stern rebukings of the warrior's nature with the anxious forebodings of
the lover's heart.  And now, his mysterious meeting with Ulpius;
Goisvintha's unexpected return to health; the dreary rising and furious
progress of the night tempest, began to impress his superstitious mind
as a train of unwonted and meaning incidents, destined to mark the
fatal return of his kinswoman's influence over his own actions and
Antonina's fate.

One by one, his memory revived with laborious minuteness every incident
that had attended his different interviews with the Roman girl, from
the first night when she had strayed into his tent to the last happy
evening that he had spent with her at the deserted farm-house.  Then
tracing further backwards the course of his existence, he figured to
himself his meeting with Goisvintha among the Italian Alps; his
presence at the death of her last child, and his solemn engagement, on
hearing her recital of the massacre at Aquileia, to avenge her on the
Romans with his own hands.  Roused by these opposite pictures of the
past, his imagination peopled the future with images of Antonina again
endangered, afflicted, and forsaken; with visions of the impatient
army, spurred at length into ferocious action, making universal havoc
among the people of Rome, and forcing him back for ever into their
avenging ranks.  No decision for resistance or resignation to flight
presented itself to his judgment.  Doubt, despair, and apprehension
held unimpeded sway over his impressible but inactive faculties.  The
night itself, as he looked forth on it, was not more dark; the wild
thunder, as he listened to it, not more gloomy; the name of Goisvintha,
as he thought on it, not more ominous of evil, than the sinister
visions that now startled his imagination and oppressed his weary mind.


There was something indescribably simple, touching, and eloquent in the
very positions of Hermanric and Antonina as they now sat together--the
only members of their respective nations who were united in affection
and peace--in the lonely farm-house.  Both the girl's hands were
clasped over Hermanric's shoulder, and her head rested on them, turned
from the door towards the interior of the room, and so displaying her
rich, black hair in all its luxuriance.  The head of the Goth was still
sunk on his breast, as though he were wrapped in a deep sleep, and his
hands hung listlessly side by side over the scabbard of his sheathed
sword, which lay across his knees.  The fire flamed only at intervals,
the fresh log that had been placed on it not having been thoroughly
kindled as yet. Sometimes the light played on the white folds of
Antonina's dress; sometimes over the bright surface of Hermanric's
cuirass, which he had removed and laid by his side on the ground;
sometimes over his sword, and his hands, as they rested on it; but it
was not sufficiently powerful or lasting to illuminate the room, the
walls and corners of which it left in almost complete darkness.

The thunder still pealed from without, but the rain and wind had
partially lulled.  The night hours had moved on more swiftly than our
narrative of the events that marked them.  It was now midnight.

No sound within the room reached Antonina's ear but the quick rattling
of the door-latch, shaken in its socket by the wind.  As one by one the
moments journeyed slowly onward, it made its harsh music with as
monotonous a regularity as though it were moved by their progress, and
kept pace with their eternal march.  Gradually the girl found herself
listening to this sharp, discordant sound, with all the attention she
could have bestowed at other times on the ripple of a distant rivulet
or the soothing harmony of a lute, when, just as it seemed adapting
itself most easily to her senses, it suddenly ceased, and the next
instant a gust of wind, like that which had rushed through the open
door on the breaking of the rotten bar, waved her hair about her face
and fluttered the folds of her light, loose dress.  She raised her head
and whispered tremulously to Hermanric--

'The door is open again--the latch has given way!'

The Goth started from his reverie and looked up hastily.  At that
instant the rattling of the latch recommenced as suddenly as it had
ceased, and the air of the room recovered its former tranquillity.

'Calm yourself, beloved one,' said Hermanric gently; 'your fancy has
misled you--the door is safe.'

He parted back her dishevelled hair caressingly as he spoke.  Incapable
of doubting the lightest word that fell from his lips, and hearing no
suspicious or unwonted sound in the room, she never attempted to
justify her suspicions.  As she again rested her head on his shoulder,
a vague misgiving oppressed her heart, and drew from her an
irrepressible sigh; but she gave her apprehensions no expression in
words.  After listening for a moment more to assure himself of the
security of the latch, the Goth resumed insensibly the contemplations
from which he had been disturbed; once more his head drooped, and again
his hands returned mechanically to their old listless position, side by
side, on the scabbard of his sword.

The faint, fickle flames still rose and fell, gleaming here and sinking
there, the latch sounded sharply in its socket, the thunder yet uttered
its surly peal, but the wind was now subsiding into fainter moans, and
the rain began to splash faintly and more faintly against the shutters
without.  To the watchers in the farm-house nothing was altered to the
eye, and little to the ear.  Fatal security!  The last few minutes had
darkly determined their future destinies--in the loved and cherished
retreat they were now no longer alone.

They heard no stealthy footsteps pacing round their dwelling, they saw
no fierce eyes peering into the interior of the farm-house through a
chink in the shutters, they marked no dusky figure passing through the
softly and quickly opened door, and gliding into the darkest corner of
the room.  Yet, now as they sat together, communing in silence with
their young, sad hearts, the threatening figure of Goisvintha stood,
shrouded in congenial darkness, under their protecting roof and in
their beloved chamber, rising still and silent almost at their very
sides.

Though the fire of her past fever had raged again through her veins,
and though startling visions of the murders at Aquileia had flashed
before her mind as the wild lightning before her eyes, she had traced
her way through the suburbs and along the high-road, and down the
little path to the farm-house gate, without straying, without
hesitating.  Regardless of the darkness and the storm, she had prowled
about the house, had raised the latch, had waited for a loud peal of
thunder ere she passed the door, and had stolen shadow-like into the
darkest corner of the room, with a patience and a determination that
nothing could disturb. And now, when she stood at the goal of her worst
wishes, even now, when she looked down upon the two beings by whom she
had been thwarted and deceived, her fierce self-possession did not
desert her; her lips quivered over her locked teeth, her bosom heaved
beneath her drenched garments, but neither sighs nor curses, not even a
smile of triumph or a movement of anger escaped her.

She never looked at Antonina; her eyes wandered not for a moment from
Hermanric's form.  The quickest, faintest gleam of firelight that
gleamed over it was followed through its fitful course by her eager
glance, rapid and momentary as itself.  Soon her attention was fixed
wholly upon his hands, as they lay over the scabbard of his sword; and
then, slowly and obscurely, a new and fatal resolution sprung up within
her.  The various emotions pictured in her face became resolved into
one sinister expression, and, without removing her eyes from the Goth,
she slowly drew from the bosom-folds of her garment a long sharp knife.

The flames alternately trembled into light and subsided into darkness
as at first; Hermanric and Antonina yet continued in their old
positions, absorbed in their thoughts and in themselves; and still
Goisvintha remained unmoved as ever, knife in hand, watchful, steady,
silent as before.

But beneath the concealment of her outward tranquillity raged a
contention under which her mind darkened and her heart writhed.  Twice
she returned the knife to its former hiding-place, and twice she drew
it forth again; her cheeks grew paler and paler, she pressed her
clenched hand convulsively over her bosom, and leant back languidly
against the wall behind her.  No thought of Antonina had part in this
great strife of secret emotions; her wrath had too much of anguish in
it to be spent against a stranger and an enemy.

After the lapse of a few moments more, her strength returned--her
firmness was aroused.  The last traces of grief and despair that had
hitherto appeared in her eyes vanished from them in an instant. Rage,
vengeance, ferocity, lowered over them as she crept stealthily forward
to the very side of the Goth, and, when the next gleam of the fire
played upon him, drew the knife fiercely across the back of his hands.
The cut was true, strong, and rapid--it divided the tendons from first
to last--he was crippled for life.

At that instant the fire touched the very heart of the log that had
been laid on it.  It crackled gaily; it blazed out brilliantly.  The
whole room was as brightly illuminated as if a Christmas festival of
ancient England had been preparing within its walls!

The warm, cheerful light showed the Goth the figure of his assassin,
ere the first cry of anguish had died away on his lips, or the first
start of irrepressible horror ceased to vibrate through his frame.  The
cries of his hapless companion, as the whole scene of vengeance,
treachery, and mutilation flashed in one terrible instant before her
eyes, seemed not even to reach his ears.  Once he looked down upon his
helpless hands, when the sword rolled heavily from them to the floor.
Then his gaze directed itself immovably upon Goisvintha, as she stood
at a little distance from him, with her blood-stained knife, silent as
himself.


There was no fury--no defiance--not even the passing distortion of
physical suffering in his features, as he now looked on her.  Blank,
rigid horror--tearless, voiceless, helpless despair, seemed to have
petrified the expression of his face into an everlasting form,
unyouthful and unhopeful--as if he had been imprisoned from his
childhood, and a voice was now taunting him with the pleasures of
liberty, from a grating in his dungeon walls.  Not even when Antonina,
recovering from her first agony of terror, pressed her convulsive
kisses on his cold cheek, entreating him to look on her, did he turn
his head, or remove his eyes from Goisvintha's form.

At length the deep steady accents of the woman's voice were heard
through the desolate silence.

'Traitor in word and thought you may be yet, but traitor in deed you
never more shall be!' she began, pointing to his hands with her knife.
'Those hands, that have protected a Roman life, shall never grasp a
Roman sword, shall never pollute again by their touch a Gothic weapon!
I remembered, as I watched you in the darkness, how the women of my
race once punished their recreant warriors when they fled to them from
a defeat.  So have I punished you!  The arm that served not the cause
of sister and sister's children--of king and king's nation--shall serve
no other!  I am half avenged of the murders at Aquileia, now that I am
avenged on you!  Go, fly with the Roman you have chosen to the city of
her people!  Your life as a warrior is at an end!'

He made her no answer.  There are emotions, the last of a life, which
tear back from nature the strongest barriers that custom raises to
repress her, which betray the lurking existence of the first rude
social feeling of the primeval days of a great nation, in the breasts
of their most distant descendants, however widely their acquirements,
their prosperities, or their changes may seem to have morally separated
them from their ancestors of old.  Such were the emotions now awakened
in the heart of the Goth.  His Christianity, his love, his knowledge of
high aims, and his experience of new ideas, sank and deserted him, as
though he had never known them.  He thought on his mutilated hands, and
no other spirit moved within him, but the ancient Gothic spirit of
centuries back; the inspiration of his nation's early Northern songs
and early Northern achievements--the renown of courage and the
supremacy of strength.

Vainly did Antonina, in the midst of the despair that still possessed
her, yearn for a word from his lips or a glance from his eyes; vainly
did her trembling fingers, tearing the bandages from her robe, stanch
the blood on his wounded hands; vainly did her voice call on him to fly
and summon help from his companions in the camp!  His mind was far
away, brooding over the legends of the battle-fields of his ancestors,
remembering how, even in the day of victory, they slew themselves if
they were crippled in the fray, how they scorned to exist for other
interests than the interests of strife, how they mutilated traitors as
Goisvintha had mutilated him!  Such were the objects that enchained his
inward faculties, while his outward senses were still enthralled by the
horrible fascination that existed for him in the presence of the
assassin by his side.  His very consciousness of his existence, though
he moved and breathed, seemed to have ceased.

'You thought to deceive me in my sickness, you hoped to profit by my
death,' resumed Goisvintha, returning contemptuously her victim's
glance.  'You trusted in the night, and the darkness, and the storm;
you were secure in your boldness, in your strength, in the secrecy of
this lurking-place that you have chosen for your treachery, but your
stratagems and your expectations have failed you!  At Aquileia I learnt
to be wily and watchful as you!  I discovered your desertion of the
warriors and the camp; I penetrated the paths to your hiding-place; I
entered it as softly as I once departed from the dwelling where my
children were slain!  In my just vengeance I have treated you as
treacherously as you would have treated me!  Remember your murdered
brother; remember the child I put into your arms wounded and received
from them dead; remember your broken oaths and forgotten promises, and
make to your nation, to your duties, and to me, the atonement--the last
and the only one--that in my mercy I have left in your power--the
atonement of death.'


Again she paused, and again no reply awaited her.  Still the Goth
neither moved nor spoke, and still Antonina--kneeling unconsciously
upon the sword, now useless to him for ever--continued to stanch the
blood on his hands with a mechanical earnestness that seemed to shut
out the contemplation of every other object from her eyes.  The tears
streamed incessantly down her cheeks, but she never turned towards
Goisvintha, never suspended her occupation.

Meanwhile, the fire still blazed noisily on the cheerful hearth; but
the storm, as if disdaining the office of heightening the human horror
of the farm-house scene, was rapidly subsiding.  The thunder pealed
less frequently and less loudly, the wind fell into intervals of
noiseless calm, and occasionally the moonlight streamed, in momentary
brightness, through the ragged edges of the fast breaking clouds.  The
breath of the still morning was already moving upon the firmament of
the stormy night.

'Has life its old magic for you yet?' continued Goisvintha, in tones of
pitiless reproach.  'Have you forgotten, with the spirit of your
people, the end for which your ancestors lived?  Is not your sword at
your feet? Is not the knife in my hand?  Do not the waters of the
Tiber, rolling yonder to the sea, offer to you the grave of oblivion
that all may seek? Die then!  In your last hour be a Goth; even to the
Romans you are worthless now!  Already your comrades have discovered
your desertion; will you wait till you are hung for a rebel?  Will you
live to implore the mercy of your enemies, or, dishonoured and
defenceless, will you endeavour to escape?  You are of the blood of my
family, but again I say it to you--die!'

His pale lips trembled; he looked round for the first time at Antonina,
but his utterance struggled ineffectually, even yet, against unyielding
despair.  He was still silent.

Goisvintha turned from him disdainfully, and approaching the fire sat
down before it, bending her haggard features over the brilliant flames.
For a few minutes she remained absorbed in her evil thoughts, but no
articulate word escaped her; and when at length she again abruptly
broke the silence, it was not to address the Goth or to fix her eyes on
him as before.

Still cowering over the fire, apparently as regardless of the presence
of the two beings whose happiness she had just crushed for ever as if
they had never existed, she began to recite, in solemn, measured,
chanting tones, a legend of the darkest and earliest age of Gothic
history, keeping time to herself with the knife that she still held in
her hand.  The malignity in her expression, as she pursued her
employment, betrayed the heartless motive that animated it, almost as
palpably as the words of the composition she was repeating:  thus she
now spoke:--

    'The tempest-god's pinions o'ershadow the sky,
    The waves leap to welcome the storm that is nigh,
    Through the hall of old Odin re-echo the shocks
    That the fierce ocean hurls at his rampart of rocks,
    As, alone on the crags that soar up from the sands,
    With his virgin SIONA the young AGNAR stands;
    Tears sprinkle their dew on the sad maiden's cheeks,
    And the voice of the chieftain sinks low while he speaks:

    "Crippled in the fight for ever,
    Number'd with the worse than slain;
    Weak, deform'd, disabled!--never
    Can I join the hosts again!
    With the battle that is won
    AGNAR'S earthly course is run!

    "When thy shatter'd frame must yield,
    If thou seek'st a future field;
    When thy arm, that sway'd the strife,
    Fails to shield thy worthless life;
    When thy hands no more afford
    Full employment to the sword;
    Then, preserve--respect thy name;
    Meet thy death--to live is shame!
    Such is Odin's mighty will;
    Such commands I now fulfil!"'

At this point in the legend, she paused and turned suddenly to observe
its effect on Hermanric.  All its horrible application to himself
thrilled through his heart.  His head drooped, and a low groan burst
from his lips.  But even this evidence of the suffering she was
inflicting failed to melt the iron malignity of Goisvintha's
determination.


'Do you remember the death of Agnar?' she cried.  'When you were a
child, I sung it to you ere you slept, and you vowed as you heard it,
that when you were a man, if you suffered his wounds you would die his
death!  He was crippled in a victory, yet he slew himself on the day of
his triumph; you are crippled in your treachery, and have forgotten
your boy's honour, and will live in the darkness of your shame!  Have
you lost remembrance of that ancient song?  You heard it from me in the
morning of your years; listen, and you shall hear it to the end; it is
the dirge for your approaching death!'

She continued--

    "SIONA, mourn not!--where I go
    The warriors feel nor pain nor woe;
    They raise aloft the gleaming steel,
    Their wounds, though warm, untended heal;
    Their arrows bellow through the air
    In showers, as they battle there;
    In mighty cups their wine is pour'd,
    Bright virgins throng their midnight board!

    "Yet think not that I die unmov'd;
    I mourn the doom that sets me free,
    As I think, betroth'd--belov'd,
    On all the joys I lose in thee!
    To form my boys to meet the fray,
    Where'er the Gothic banner streams;
    To guard thy night, to glad thy day,
    Made all the bliss of AGNAR'S dreams--
    Dreams that must now be all forgot,
    Earth's joys have passed from AGNAR'S lot!

    "See, athwart the face of light
    Float the clouds of sullen Night!
    Odin's warriors watch for me
    By the earth-encircling sea!
    The water's dirges howl my knell;
    'Tis time I die--Farewell-Farewell!"

    'He rose with a smile to prepare for the spring,
    He flew from the rock like a bird on the wing;
    The sea met her prey with a leap and a roar,
    And the maid stood alone by the wave-riven shore!

    The winds mutter'd deep, with a woe-boding sound,
    As she wept o'er the footsteps he'd left on the ground;
    And the wild vultures shriek'd, for the chieftain who spread
    Their battle-field banquets was laid with the dead!'

As, with a slow and measured emphasis, Goisvintha pronounced the last
lines of the poem she again approached Hermanric.  But the eyes of the
Goth sought her no longer.  She had calmed the emotions that she had
hoped to irritate.  Of the latter divisions of her legend, those only
which were pathetic had arrested the lost chieftain's attention, and
the blunted faculties of his heart recovered their old refinement as he
listened to them.  A solemn composure of love, grief, and pity appeared
in the glance of affection that he now directed on the girl's
despairing countenance.  Years of good thoughts, an existence of tender
cares, an eternity of youthful devotion spoke in that rapt, momentary,
eloquent gaze, and imprinted on his expression a character ineffably
beautiful and calm--a nobleness above the human, and approaching the
angelic and divine.

Intuitively Goisvintha followed the direction of his eyes, and looked,
like him, on the Roman girl's face.  A lowering expression of hatred
replaced the scorn that had hitherto distorted her passionate features.
Mechanically her hand again half raised the knife, and the accents of
her wrathful voice once more disturbed the sacred silence of affection
and grief.

'Is it for the girl there that you would still live?' she cried
sternly. 'I foreboded it, coward, when I  first looked on you!  I
prepared for it when I wounded you!  I made sure that when my anger
again threatened this new ruler of your thoughts and mover of your
actions, you should have lost the power to divert it from her again!
Think you that, because my disdain has delayed it, my vengeance on her
is abandoned? Long since I swore to you that she should die, and I will
hold to my purpose! I have punished you; I will slay her!  Can you
shield her from the blow to-night, as you shielded her in your tent?
You are weaker before me than a child!'

She ceased abruptly, for at this moment a noise of hurrying footsteps
and contending voices became suddenly audible from without.  As she
heard it, a ghastly paleness chased the flush of anger from her cheeks.
With the promptitude of apprehension she snatched the sword of
Hermanric from under Antonina, and ran it through the staples intended
to hold the rude bar of the door.  The next instant the footsteps
sounded on the garden path, and the next the door was assailed.

The good sword held firm, but the frail barrier that it sustained
yielded at the second shock and fell inwards, shattered, to the floor.
Instantly the gap was darkened by human forms, and the firelight glowed
over the repulsive countenances of two Huns who headed the intruders,
habited in complete armour and furnished with naked swords.

'Yield yourself prisoner by Alaric's command,' cried one of the
barbarians, 'or you shall be slain as a deserter where you now stand!'

The Goth had risen to his feet as the door was burst in.  The arrival
of his pursuers seemed to restore his lost energies, to deliver him at
once from an all-powerful thraldom.  An expression of triumph and
defiance shone over his steady features when he heard the summons of
the Hun. For a moment he stooped towards Antonina, as she clung
fainting round him.  His mouth quivered and his eye glistened as he
kissed her cold cheek.  In that moment all the hopelessness of his
position, all the worthlessness of his marred existence, all the
ignominy preparing for him when he returned to the camp, rushed over
his mind.  In that moment the worst horrors of departure and death, the
fiercest rackings of love and despair, assailed but did not overcome
him.  In that moment he paid his final tribute to the dues of
affection, and braced for the last time the fibres of manly
dauntlessness and Spartan resolve!

The next instant he tore himself from the girl's arms, the old
hero-spirit of his conquering nation possessed every nerve in his
frame, his eye brightened again gloriously with its lost warrior-light,
his limbs grew firm, his face was calm, he confronted the Huns with a
mien of authority and a smile of disdain, and, as he presented to them
his defenceless breast, not the faintest tremor was audible in his
voice, while he cried in accents of steady command--

'Strike!  I yield not!'

The Huns rushed forward with fierce cries, and buried their swords in
his body.  His warm young blood gushed out upon the floor of the
dwelling which had been the love-shrine of the heart that shed it.
Without a sigh from his lips or a convulsion on his features, he fell
dead at the feet of his enemies; all the valour of his disposition, all
the gentleness of his heart, all the vigour of his form, resolved in
one humble instant into a senseless and burdensome mass!

Antonina beheld the assassination, but was spared the sight of the
death that followed it.  She fell insensible by the side of her young
warrior--her dress was spotted with his blood, her form was motionless
as his own.

'Leave him there to rot!  His pride in his superiority will not serve
him now--even to a grave!' cried the Hun leader to his companions, as
he dried on the garments of the corpse his reeking sword.

'And this woman,' demanded one of his comrades, 'is she to be liberated
or secured?'

He pointed as he spoke to Goisvintha.  During the brief scene of the
assassination, the very exercise of her faculties seemed to have been
suspended.  She had never stirred a limb or uttered a word.

The Hun recognised her as the woman who had questioned and bribed him
at the camp.  'She is the traitor's kinswoman and is absent from the
tents without leave,' he answered.  'Take her prisoner to Alaric; she
will bear us witness that we have done as he commanded us.  As for the
girl,' he continued, glancing at the blood on Antonina's dress, and
stirring her figure carelessly with his foot, 'she may be dead too, for
she neither moves nor speaks, and may be left like her protector to lie
graveless where she is.  For us, it is time that we depart--the king is
impatient of delay.'


As they led her roughly from the house, Goisvintha shuddered, and
attempted to pause for a moment when she passed the corpse of the Goth.
Death, that can extinguish enmities as well as sunder loves, rose awful
and appealing as she looked her last at her murdered brother, and
remembered her murdered husband.  No tears flowed from her eyes, no
groans broke from her bosom; but there was a pang, a last momentary
pang of grief and pity at her heart as she murmured while they forced
her away--'Aquileia! Aquileia! have I outlived thee for this!'

The troops retired. For a few minutes silence ruled uninterruptedly
over the room where the senseless girl still lay by the side of all
that was left to her of the object of her first youthful love. But ere
long footsteps again approached the farm-house door, and two Goths, who
had formed part of the escort allotted to the Hun, approached the young
chieftain's corpse. Quickly and silently they raised it in their arms
and bore it into the garden. There they scooped a shallow hole with
their swords in the fresh, flower-laden turf, and having laid the body
there, they hastily covered it, and rapidly departed without returning
to the house.

These men had served among the warriors committed to Hermanric's
command.  By many acts of frank generosity and encouragement, the young
chieftain had won their rough attachment.  They mourned his fate, but
dared not obstruct the sentence, or oppose the act that determined it.
At their own risk they had secretly quitted the advancing ranks of
their comrades, to use the last privilege and obey the last dictate of
human kindness; and they thought not of the lonely girl as they now
left her desolate, and hurried away to reassume their appointed
stations ere it was too late.

The turf lay caressingly round the young warrior's form; its crushed
flowers pressed softly against his cold cheek; the fragrance of the new
morning wafted its pure incense gently about his simple grave! Around
him flowered the delicate plants that the hand of Antonina had raised
to please his eye.  Near him stood the dwelling, sacred to the first
and last kiss that he had impressed upon her lips; and about him, on
all sides, rose the plains and woodlands that had engrossed, with her
image, the devotion of all her dearest thoughts.  He lay, in his death,
in the midst of the magic circle of the best joys of his life!  It was
a fitter burial-place for the earthly relics of that bright and
generous spirit than the pit in the carnage-laden battle-field, or the
desolate sepulchres of a northern land!



CHAPTER 19.

THE GUARDIAN RESTORED.

Not long is the new-made grave left unwatched to the solemn
guardianship of Solitude and Night. More than a few minutes have
scarcely elapsed since it was dug, yet already human footsteps press
its yielding surface, and a human glance scans attentively its small
and homely mound.

But it is not Antonina, whom he loved; it is not Goisvintha, through
whose vengeance he was lost, who now looks upon the earth above the
young warrior's corpse.  It is a stranger, an outcast; a man lost,
dishonoured, abandoned--it is the solitary and ruined Ulpius who now
gazes with indifferent eyes upon the peaceful garden and the eloquent
grave.

In the destinies of woe committed to the keeping of the night, the
pagan had been fatally included. The destruction that had gone forth
against the body of the young man who lay beneath the earth had
overtaken the mind of the old man who stood over his simple grave.  The
frame of Ulpius, with all its infirmities, was still there, but the
soul of ferocious patience and unconquerable daring that had lighted it
grandly in its ruin was gone.  Over the long anguish of that woeful
life the veil of self-oblivion had closed for ever!


He had been dismissed by Alaric, but he had not returned to the city
whither he was bidden.  Throughout the night he had wandered about the
lonely suburbs, striving in secret and horrible suffering for the
mastery of his mind.  There did the overthrow of all his hopes from the
Goths expand rapidly into the overthrow of the whole intellect that had
created his aspirations.  There had reason burst the bonds that had so
long chained, perverted, degraded it!  At length, wandering hither and
thither, he had dragged the helpless body, possessed no longer by the
perilous mind, to the farm-house garden in which he now stood, gazing
alternately at the upturned sods of the chieftain's grave and the red
gleam of the fire as it glowed from the dreary room through the gap of
the shattered door.

His faculties were fatally disordered rather than utterly destroyed.
His penetration, his firmness, and his cunning were gone; but a wreck
of memory, useless and unmanageable--a certain capacity for momentary
observation still remained to him.  The shameful miscarriage in the
tent of Alaric, which had overthrown his faculties, had passed from him
as an event that never happened, but he remembered fragments of his
past existence--he still retained a vague consciousness of the ruling
purpose of his whole life.

These embryo reflections, disconnected and unsustained, flitted to and
fro over his dark mind as luminous exhalations over a marsh--rising and
sinking, harmless and delusive, fitful and irregular. What he
remembered of the past he remembered carelessly, viewing it with as
vacant a curiosity as if it were the visionary spectacle of another
man's struggles and misfortunes and hopes, acting under it as under a
mysterious influence, neither the end nor the reason of which he cared
to discover.  For the future, it was to his thoughts a perfect blank;
for the present, it was a jarring combination of bodily weariness and
mental repose.

He shuddered as he stood shelterless under the open heaven.  The cold,
that he had defied in the vaults of the rifted wall, pierced in the
farm-house garden; his limbs, which had resisted repose on the hard
journey from Rome to the camp of the Goths, now trembled so that he was
fain to rest them on the ground.  For a short time he sat glaring with
vacant and affrighted eyes upon the open dwelling before him, as though
he longed to enter it but dare not.  At length the temptation of the
ruddy firelight seemed to vanquish his irresolution; he rose with
difficulty, and slowly and hesitatingly entered the house.

He had advanced, thief-like, but a few steps, he had felt but for a
moment the welcome warmth of the fire, when the figure of Antonina,
still extended insensible upon the floor, caught his eye; he approached
it with eager curiosity, and, raising the girl on his arm, looked at
her with a long and rigid scrutiny.

For some moments no expression of recognition passed his lips or
appeared on his countenance, as, with a mechanical, doting gesture of
fondness, he smoothed her dishevelled hair over her forehead.  While he
was thus engaged, while the remains of the gentleness of his childhood
were thus awfully revived in the insanity of his age, a musical string
wound round a small piece of gilt wood fell from its concealment in her
bosom; he snatched it from the ground--it was the fragment of her
broken lute, which had never quitted her since the night when, in her
innocent grief, she had wept over it in her maiden bed-chamber.

Small, obscure, insignificant as it was, this little token touched the
fibre in the Pagan's shattered mind which the all-eloquent form and
presence of its hapless mistress had failed to reach; his memory flew
back instantly to the garden on the Pincian Mount, and to his past
duties in Numerian's household, but spoke not to him of the calamities
he had wreaked since that period on his confiding master.  His
imagination presented to him at this moment but one image--his
servitude in the Christian's abode; and as he now looked on the girl he
could regard himself but in one light--as 'the guardian restored'.

'What does she with her music here?' he whispered apprehensively.
'This is not her father's house, and the garden yonder looks not from
the summit of the hill!'

As he curiously examined the room, the red spots on the floor suddenly
attracted his attention.  A panic, a frantic terror seemed instantly to
overwhelm him.  He rose with a cry of horror, and, still holding the
girl on his arm, hurried out into the garden trembling and breathless,
as if the weapon of an assassin had scared him from the house.


The shock of her rough removal, the sudden influence of the fresh, cold
air, restored Antonina to the consciousness of life at the moment when
Ulpius, unable to support her longer, laid her against the little heap
of turf which marked the position of the young chieftain's grave.  Her
eyes opened wildly; their first glance fixed upon the shattered door
and the empty room.  She rose from the ground, advanced a few steps
towards the house, then paused, rigid, breathless, silent, and, turning
slowly, faced the upturned turf.

The grave was all-eloquent of its tenant.  His cuirass, which the
soldiers had thought to bury with the body that it had defended in
former days, had been overlooked in the haste of the secret interment,
and lay partly imbedded in the broken earth, partly exposed to view--a
simple monument over a simple grave!  Her tearless, dilated eyes looked
down on it as though they would number each blade of grass, each morsel
of earth by which it was surrounded!  Her hair waved idly about her
cheeks, as the light wind fluttered it; but no expression passed over
her face, no gestures escaped her limbs.  Her mind toiled and quivered,
as if crushed by a fiery burden; but her heart was voiceless, and her
body was still.

Ulpius had stood unnoticed by her side.  At this moment he moved so as
to confront her, and she suddenly looked up at him.  A momentary
expression of bewilderment and suspicion lightened the heavy vacancy of
despair which had chased their natural and feminine tenderness from her
eyes, but it disappeared rapidly.  She turned from the Pagan, knelt
down by the grave, and pressed her face and bosom against the little
mound of turf beneath her.

No voice comforted her, no arm caressed her, as her mind now began to
penetrate the mysteries, to probe the darkest depths of the long
night's calamities!  Unaided and unsolaced, while the few and waning
stars glimmered from their places in the sky, while the sublime
stillness of tranquillised Nature stretched around her, she knelt at
the altar of death, and raised her soul upward to the great heaven
above her, charged with its sacred offering of human grief!

Long did she thus remain; and when at length she arose from the ground,
when, approaching the Pagan, she fixed on him her tearless, dreary
eyes, he quailed before her glance, as his dull faculties struggled
vainly to resume the old, informing power that they had now for ever
lost. Nothing but the remembrance aroused by his first sight of the
fragment of the lute lived within even yet, as he whispered to her in
low, entreating tones--

'Come home--come home!  Your father may return before us--come home!'

As the words 'home' and 'father'--those household gods of the heart's
earliest existence--struck upon her ears, a change flashed with
electric suddenness over the girl's whole aspect.  She raised her wan
hands to the sky; all her woman's tenderness repossessed itself of her
heart; and as she again knelt down over the grave, her sobs rose
audibly through the calmed and fragrant air.

With Hermanric's corpse beneath her, with the blood-sprinkled room
behind her, with a hostile army and a famine-wasted city beyond her, it
was only through that flood of tears, that healing passion of gentle
emotions, that she rose superior to the multiplied horrors of her
situation at the very moment when her faculties and her life seemed
sinking under them alike.  Fully, freely, bitterly she wept, on the
kindly and parent earth--the patient, friendly ground that once bore
the light footsteps of the first of a race not created for death; that
now holds in its sheltering arms the loved ones, whom, in mourning, we
lay there to sleep; that shall yet be bound to the farthermost of its
depths, when the sun-bright presence of returning spirits shines over
its renovated frame, and love is resumed in angel perfection at the
point where death suspended it in mortal frailness!

'Come home--your father is awaiting you--come home!' repeated the Pagan
vacantly, moving slowly away as he spoke.


At the sound of his voice she started up, and clasping his arm with her
trembling fingers, to arrest his progress, looked affrightedly into his
seared and listless countenance.  As she thus gazed on him she appeared
for the first time to recognise him.  Fear and astonishment mingled in
her expression with grief and despair as she sunk at his feet, moaning
in tones of piercing entreaty--

'O Ulpius!--if Ulpius you are--have pity on me and take me to my
father! My father! my father!  In all the lonely world there is nothing
left to me but my father!'

'Why do you weep to me about your broken lute?' answered Ulpius, with a
dull, unmeaning smile; 'it was not I that destroyed it!'

'They have slain him!' she shrieked distractedly, heedless of the
Pagan's reply.  'I saw them draw their swords on him!  See, his blood
is on me--me!--Antonina, whom he protected and loved!  Look there; that
is a grave--his grave--I know it!  I have never seen him since; he is
down--down there! under the flowers I grew to gather for him!  They
slew him; and when I knew it not, they have buried him!--or you--you
have buried him!  You have hidden him under the cold garden earth!  He
is gone!--Ah, gone, gone--for ever gone!'

And she flung herself again with reckless violence on the grave.  After
looking steadfastly on her for a moment, Ulpius approached and raised
her from the earth.

'Come!' he cried angrily, 'the night grows on--your father waits!'

'The walls of Rome shut me from my father!  I shall never see my father
nor Hermanric again!' she cried, in tones of bitter anguish,
remembering more perfectly all the miseries of her position, and
struggling to release herself from the Pagan's grasp.

The walls of Rome!  At those words the mind of Ulpius opened to a flow
of dark remembrances, and lost the visions that had occupied it until
that moment.  He laughed triumphantly.

'The walls of Rome bow to my arm!' he cried, in exulting tones; 'I
pierced them with my good bar of iron!  I wound through them with my
bright lantern!  Spirits roared on me, and struck me down, and grinned
upon me in the thick darkness, but I passed the wall!  The thunder
pealed around me as I crawled along the winding rifts; but I won my way
through them!  I came out conquering on the other side!  Come, come,
come, come!  We will return!  I know the track, even in the darkness!
I can outwatch the sentinels!  You shall walk in the pathway that I
have broken through the bricks!

The girl's features lost for a moment their expression of grief, and
grew rigid with horror, as she glanced at his fiery eyes, and felt the
fearful suspicion of his insanity darkening over her mind.  She stood
powerless, trembling, unresisting, in his grasp, without attempting to
delude him into departure or to appease him into delay.

'Why did I make my passage through the wall?' muttered the Pagan in a
low, awe-struck voice, suddenly checking himself, as he was about to
step forward.  'Why did I tear down the strong brick-work and go forth
into the dark suburbs?'

He paused, and for a few moments struggled with his purposeless and
disconnected thoughts; but a blank, a darkness, an annihilation
overwhelmed Alaric and the Gothic camp, which he vainly endeavoured to
disperse.  He sighed bitterly to himself--'It is gone!' and still
grasping Antonina by the hand, drew her after him to the garden gate.

'Leave me!' she shrieked, as he passed onward into the pathway that led
to the high-road.  'Oh, be merciful, and leave me to die where he has
died!'

'Peace! or I will rend you limb by limb, as I rent the stones from the
wall when I passed through it!' he whispered to her in fierce accents,
as she struggled to escape him.  'You shall return with me to Rome!
You shall walk in the track that I have made in the rifted brick-work!'


Terror, anguish, exhaustion, overpowered her weak efforts.  Her lips
moved, partly in prayer and partly in ejaculation; but she spoke in
murmurs only, as she mechanically suffered the Pagan to lead her onward
by the hand.

They paced on under the waning starlight, over the cold, lonely road,
and through the dreary and deserted suburbs,--a fearful and discordant
pair!  Coldly, obediently, impassively, as if she were walking in a
dream, the spirit-broken girl moved by the side of her scarce-human
leader.  Disjointed exclamation, alternating horribly between infantine
simplicity and fierce wickedness, poured incessantly from the Pagan's
lips, but he never addressed himself further to his terror-stricken
companion.  So, wending rapidly onward, they gained the Gothic lines;
and here the madman slackened his pace, and paused, beast-like, to
glare around him, as he approached the habitations of men.

Still not opposed by Antonina, whose faculties of observation were
petrified by her terror into perfect inaction, even here, within reach
of the doubtful aid of the enemies of her people, the Pagan crept
forward through the loneliest places of the encampment, and, guided by
the mysterious cunning of his miserable race, eluded successfully the
observation of the drowsy sentinels.  Never bewildered by the
darkness--for the moon had gone down--always led by the animal instinct
co-existent with his disease, he passed over the waste ground between
the hostile encampment and the city, and arrived triumphant at the heap
of stones that marked his entrance to the rifted wall.

For one moment he stopped, and turning towards the girl, pointed
proudly to the dark, low breach he was about to penetrate.  Then,
drawing her half-fainting form closer to his side, looking up
attentively to the ramparts, and stepping as noiselessly as though turf
were beneath his feet, he entered the dusky rift with his helpless
charge.

As they disappeared in the recesses of the wall, Night--the stormy, the
eventful, the fatal!--reached its last limit; and the famished sentinel
on the fortifications of the besieged city roused himself from his
dreary and absorbing thoughts, for he saw that the new day was dawning
in the east.



CHAPTER 20.

THE BREACH REPASSED.

Slowly and mournfully the sentinel at the rifted wall raised his eyes
towards the eastern clouds as they brightened before the advancing
dawn. Desolate as was the appearance of the dull, misty daybreak, it
was yet the most welcome of all the objects surrounding the starving
soldier on which he could fix his languid gaze.  To look back on the
city behind him was to look back on the dreary charnel-house of famine
and death; to look down on the waste ground without the walls was to
look down on the dead body of the comrade of his watch, who, maddened
by the pangs of hunger which he had suffered during the night, had cast
himself from the rampart to meet a welcome death on the earth beneath.
Famished and despairing, the sentinel crouched on the fortifications
which he had now neither strength to pace nor care to defend, yearning
for the food that he had no hope to obtain, as he watched the grey
daybreak from his solitary post.

While he was thus occupied, the gloomy silence of the scene was
suddenly broken by the sound of falling brick-work at the inner base of
the wall, followed by faint entreaties for mercy and deliverance, which
rose on his ear, strangely mingled with disjointed expression of
defiance and exultation from a second voice.  He slowly turned his
head, and, looking down, saw on the ground beneath a young girl
struggling in the grasp of an old man, who was hurrying her onward in
the direction of the Pincian Gate.


For one moment the girl's eye met the sentinel's vacant glance, and she
renewed, with a last effort of strength, and a greater vehemence of
supplication, her cries for help; but the soldier neither moved nor
answered.  Exhausted as he was, no sight could affect him now but the
sight of food.  Like the rest of the citizens, he was sunk in a heavy
stupor of starvation--selfish, reckless, brutalised. No disasters could
depress, no atrocities rouse him.  Famine had torn asunder every social
tie, had withered every human sympathy among his besieged
fellow-citizens, and he was famishing like them.

At the moment when the dawn had first appeared, could he have looked
down by some mysterious agency to the interior foundations of the wall,
from the rampart on which he kept his weary watch, such a sight must
then have presented itself as would have aroused even his sluggish
observation to rigid attention and involuntary surprise.

Winding upward and downward among jagged masses of ruined brick-work,
now lost amid the shadows of dreary chasms, now prominent over the
elevations of rising arches, the dark irregular passages broken by
Ulpius in the rotten wall would then have presented themselves to his
eyes; not stretching forth in dismal solitude, not peopled only by the
reptiles native to the place, but traced in all their mazes by human
forms.  Then he would have perceived the fierce, resolute Pagan, moving
through darkness and obstacles with a sure, solemn progress, drawing
after him, like a dog devoted to his will, the young girl whose hapless
fate had doomed her to fall into his power.  Her half-fainting figure
might have been seen, sometimes prostrate on the higher places of the
breach, while her fearful guide descended before her into a chasm
beyond, and then turned to drag her after him to a darker and a lower
depth yet; sometimes bent in supplication, when her lips moved once
more with a last despairing entreaty, and her limbs trembled with a
final effort to escape from her captor's relentless grasp.  While
still, through all that opposed him, the same fierce tenacity of
purpose would have been invariably visible in every action of Ulpius,
constantly confirming him in his mad resolution to make his victim the
follower of his progress through the wall, ever guiding him with a
strange instinct through every hindrance, and preserving him from every
danger in his path, until it brought him forth triumphant, with his
prisoner still in his power, again free to tread the desolate streets
and mingle with the famine-stricken citizens of Rome.

And now when, after peril and anguish, she once more stood within the
city of her home, what hope remained to Antonina of obtaining her last
refuge under her father's roof, and deriving her solitary consolation
from the effort to regain her father's love?  With the termination of
his passage through the breach in the wall had ended every recollection
associated with it in the Pagan's shattered memory.  A new blank now
pervaded his lost faculties, desolate as that which had overwhelmed
them in the night when he first stood in the farm-house garden by the
young chieftain's grave.  He moved onward, unobservant, unthinking,
without aim or hope, driven by a mysterious restlessness, forgetting
the very presence of Antonina as she followed him, but still
mechanically grasping her hand, and dragging her after him he knew not
whither.

And she, on her part, made no effort more for deliverance.  She had
seen the sentinel unmoved by her entreaties, she had seen the walls of
her father's house receding from her longing eyes, as Ulpius pitilessly
hurried her father and farther from its distant door; and she lost the
last faint hope of restoration, the last lingering desire of life, as
the sense of her helplessness now weighed heaviest on her mind.  Her
heart was full of her young warrior, who had been slain, and of her
father, from whom she had parted in the hour of his wrath, as she now
feebly followed the Pagan's steps, and resigned herself to a speedy
exhaustion and death in her utter despair.


They turned from the Pincian Gate and gained the Campus Martius; and
here the aspect of the besieged city and the condition of its doomed
inhabitants were fully and fearfully disclosed to view. On the surface
of the noble area, once thronged with bustling crowds passing to and
fro in every direction as their various destinations or caprices might
lead them, not twenty moving figures were now discernible.  These few,
who still retained their strength or the resolution to pace the
greatest thoroughfare of Rome, stalked backwards and forwards
incessantly, their hollow eyes fixed on vacancy, their wan hands
pressed over their mouths; each separate, distrustful, and silent;
fierce as imprisoned madmen; restless as spectres disturbed in a place
of tombs.

Such were the citizens who still moved over the Campus Martius; and,
besetting their path wherever they turned, lay the gloomy numbers of
the dying and the dead--the victims already stricken by the pestilence
which had now arisen in the infected city, and joined the famine in its
work of desolation and death.  Around the public fountains, where the
water still bubbled up as freshly as in the summer-time of prosperity
and peace, the poorer population of beleaguered Rome had chiefly
congregated to expire.  Some still retained strength enough to drink
greedily at the margin of the stone basins, across which others lay
dead--their heads and shoulders immersed in the water--drowned from
lack of strength to draw back after their first draught.  Children
mounted over the dead bodies of their parents to raise themselves to
the fountain's brim; parents stared vacantly at the corpses of their
children alternately floating and sinking in the water, into which they
had fallen unsuccoured and unmourned.

In other parts of the place, at the open gates of the theatres and
hippodromes, in the unguarded porticoes of the palaces and the baths
lay the discoloured bodies of those who had died ere they could reach
the fountains--of women and children especially--surrounded in
frightful contrast by the abandoned furniture of luxury and the
discarded inventions of vice--by gilded couches--by inlaid tables--by
jewelled cornices--by obscene picture and statues--by brilliantly
framed, gaudily tinted manuscripts of licentious songs, still hanging
at their accustomed places on the lofty marble walls.  Farther on, in
the by-streets and the retired courts, where the corpse of the
tradesman was stretched on his empty counter; where the soldier of the
city guard dropped down overpowered ere he reached the limit of his
rounds; where the wealthy merchant lay pestilence-stricken upon the
last hoards of repulsive food which his gold had procured; the assassin
and the robber might be seen--now greedily devouring the offal that lay
around them, now falling dead upon the bodies which they had rifled but
the moment before.

Over the whole prospect, far and near, wherever it might extend,
whatever the horrors by which it might be occupied, was spread a blank,
supernatural stillness.  Not a sound arose; the living were as silent
as the dead; crime, suffering, despair, were all voiceless alike; the
trumpet was unheard in the guard-house; the bell never rang from the
church; even the thick, misty rain, that now descended from the black
and unmoving clouds, and obscured in cold shadows the outlines of
distant buildings and the pinnacle tops of mighty palaces, fell
noiseless to the ground.  The sky had no wind; the earth no echoes--the
pervading desolation appalled the eye; the vast stillness weighed dull
on the ear--it was a scene as of the last-left city of an exhausted
world, decaying noiselessly into primeval chaos.

Through this atmosphere of darkness and death, along these paths of
pestilence and famine; unregarding and unregarded, the Pagan and his
prisoner passed slowly onward towards the quarter of the city opposite
the Pincian Mount.  No ray of thought, even yet, brightened the dull
faculties of Ulpius; still he walked forward vacantly, and still he was
followed wearily by the fast-failing girl.

Sunk in her mingled stupor of bodily weakness and mental despair, she
never spoke, never raised her head, never looked forth on the one side
or the other.  She had now ceased even to feel the strong, cold grasp
of the Pagan's hand.  Shadowy visions of spheres beyond the world,
arrayed in enchanting beauty, and people with happy spirits in their
old earthly forms, where a long deathless existence moved smoothly and
dreamily onward, without mark of time or taint of woe, were opening
before her mind.  She lost all memory of afflictions and wrongs, all
apprehension of danger from the madman at whose mercy she remained.
And thus she still moved feebly onward as the will of Ulpius guided
her, with no observation of her present peril, and no anxiety for her
impending fate.


They passed the grand circular structure of the Pantheon, entered the
long narrow streets leading to the banks of the river, and finally
gained the margin of the Tiber--hard by the little island that still
rises in the midst of its waters.  Here, for the first time, the Pagan
paused mechanically in his course, and vacantly directed his dull,
dreamy eyes on the prospect before him, where the walls, stretching
abruptly outward from their ordinary direction, enclosed the Janiculum
Hill, as it rose with its irregular mass of buildings on the opposite
bank of the river.

At this sudden change from action to repose, the overtasked energies
which had hitherto gifted the limbs of Antonina with an unnatural power
of endurance, abruptly relaxed.  She sank down helpless and silent; her
head drooped towards the hard ground, as towards a welcome pillow, but
found no support, for the Pagan's iron grasp of her hand remained
unyielding as ever.  Infirm though he was, he appeared at this moment
to be unconscious that his prisoner was now hanging at his side.  Every
association connected with her, every recollection of his position with
her in her father's house, had vanished from his memory.  A darker
blindness seemed to have sunk over his bodily perceptions; his eyes
rolled slowly to and fro over the prospect before him, but regarded
nothing; his panting breaths came thick and fast; his shrunk chest
heaved as if some deep, dread agony were pent within it--it was evident
that a new crisis in his insanity was at hand.

At this moment one of the bands of marauders--the desperate criminals
of famine and plague--who still prowled through the city, appeared in
the street.  Their trembling hands sought their weapons, and their
haggard faces brightened, when they first discerned the Pagan and the
girl; but as they approached nearer they saw enough in the figures of
the two, at a glance, to destroy their hopes of seizing on them either
plunder or food.  For an instant they stood by their intended victims,
as if debating whether to murder them only for murder's sake, when the
appearance of two women, stealthily quitting a house farther on in the
street, carrying a basket covered by some tattered garments, attracted
their attention.  They turned instantly to follow the bearers of the
basket, and again Ulpius and Antonina were left alone on the river's
bank.

The appearance of the assassins had been powerless, as every other
sight or event in the city, in arousing the faculties of Ulpius.  He
had neither looked on them nor fled from them when they surrounded him;
but now when they were gone he slowly turned his head in the direction
by which they had departed.  His gaze wandered over the wet flagstones
of the street, over two corpses stretched on them at a little distance,
over the figure of a female slave who lay forsaken near the wall of one
of the houses, exerting her last energies to drink from the turbid
rain-water which ran down the kennel by her side; and still his eyes
remained unregardful of all that they encountered. The next object
which by chance attracted his vacant attention was a deserted temple.
This solitary building fixed him immediately in contemplation--it was
destined to open a new and a warning scene in the dark tragedy of his
closing life.

In his course through the city he had passed unheeded many temples far
more prominent in situation, far more imposing in structure, than this.
It was a building of no remarkable extent or extraordinary beauty.  Its
narrow porticoes and dark doorway were more fitted to repel than to
invite the eye; but it had one attraction, powerful above all glories
of architecture and all grandeur of situation to arrest in him those
wandering faculties whose sterner and loftier aims were now suspended
for ever; it was dedicated to Serapis--to the idol which had been the
deity of his first worship, and the inspiration of his last struggle
for the restoration of his faith.  The image of the god, with the
three-headed monster encircled by a serpent, obedient beneath his hand,
was carved over the portico.


What flood of emotions rushed into the vacant mind of Ulpius at the
instant when he discerned the long-loved, well-known image of the
Egyptian god, there was nothing for some moments outwardly visible in
him to betray.  His moral insensibility appeared but to be deepened as
his gaze was now fixed with rigid intensity on the temple portico.
Thus he continued to remain motionless, as if what he saw had petrified
him where he stood, when the clouds, which had been closing in deeper
and deeper blackness as the morning advanced, and which, still charged
with electricity, were gathering to revive the storm of the past night,
burst abruptly into a loud peal of thunder over his head.

At that warning sound, as if it had been the supernatural signal
awaited to arouse him, as if in one brief moment it awakened every
recollection of all that he had resolutely attempted during the night
of thunder that was past, he started into instant animation.  His
countenance brightened, his form expanded, he dropped the hand of
Antonina, raised his arm aloft towards the wrathful heaven in frantic
triumph, then staggering forwards, fell on his knees at the base of the
temple steps.

Whatever the remembrances of his passage through the wall at the
Pincian Hill, and of the toil and peril succeeding it, which had
revived when the thunder first sounded in his ear, they now vanished as
rapidly as they had arisen, and left his wandering memory free to
revert to the scenes which the image of Serapis was most fitted to
recall. Recollections of his boyish enjoyments in the temple at
Alexandria, of his youth's enthusiasm, of the triumphs of his early
manhood--all disjointed and wayward, yet all bright, glorious,
intoxicating--flashed before his shattered mind.  Tears, the first that
he had shed since his happy youth, flowed quickly down his withered
cheeks.  He pressed his hot forehead, he beat his parched hand in
ecstasy on the cold, wet steps beneath him.  He muttered breathless
ejaculations, he breathed strange murmurs of endearment, he humbled
himself in his rapturous delight beneath the walls of the temple like a
dog that has discovered his lost master and fawns affectionately at his
feet.  Criminal as he was, his joy in his abasement, his glory in his
miserable isolation from humanity, was a doom of degradation pitiable
to behold.

After an interval his mood changed.  He rose to his feet, his trembling
limbs strengthened with a youthful vigour as he ascended the temple
steps and gained its doorway.  He turned for a moment, and looked forth
over the street, ere he entered the hallowed domain of his distempered
imagination.  To him the cloudy sky above was now shining with the
radiance of the sun-bright East.  The death-laden highways of Rome, as
they stretched before him, were beautiful with lofty trees, and
populous with happy figures; and along the dark flagstones beneath,
where still lay the corpses which he had no eye to see, he beheld
already the priests of Serapis with his revered guardian, his beloved
Macrinus of former days, at their head, advancing to meet and welcome
him in the hall of the Egyptian god.  Visions such as these passed
gloriously before the Pagan's eyes as he stood triumphant on the steps
of the temple, and brightened to him with a noonday light its dusky
recesses when, after his brief delay, he turned from the street and
disappeared through the doorway of the sacred place.

The rain poured down more thickly than before; the thunder, once
aroused, now sounded in deep and frequent peals as Antonina raised
herself from the ground and looked around her, in momentary expectation
that the dreaded form of Ulpius must meet her eyes.  No living creature
was visible in the street.  The forsaken slave still reclined near the
wall of the house where she had first appeared when the Pagan gained
the approaches to the temple; but she now lay there dead.  No fresh
bands of robbers appeared in sight.  An uninterrupted solitude
prevailed in all directions as far as the eye could reach.

At the moment when Ulpius had relinquished his grasp of her hand,
Antonina had sunk to the ground, helpless and resigned, but not
exhausted beyond all power of sensation or all capacity for thought.
While she lay on the cold pavement of the street, her mind still
pursued its visions of a speedy death, and a tranquil life-in-death to
succeed it in a future state.  But, as minute after minute elapsed, and
no harsh voice sounded in her ear, no pitiless hand dragged her from
the ground, no ominous footsteps were audible around her, a change
passed gradually over her thoughts; the instinct of self-preservation
slowly revived within her, and, as she raised herself to look forth on
the gloomy prospect, the chances of uninterrupted flight and present
safety presented by the solitude of the street, aroused her like a
voice of encouragement, like an unexpected promise of help.


Her perception of outer influences returned; she felt the rain that
drenched her garments; she shuddered at the thunder sounding over her
head; she marked with horror the dead bodies lying before her on the
stones.  An overpowering desire animated her to fly from the place, to
escape from the desolate scene around, even though she should sink
exhausted by the effort in the next street. Slowly she arose--her limbs
trembled with a premature infirmity; but she gained her feet.  She
tottered onward, turning her back on the river, passed bewildered
between long rows of deserted houses, and arrived opposite a public
garden surrounding a little summer-house, whose deserted portico
offered both concealment and shelter.  Here, therefore, she took
refuge, crouching in the darkest corner of the building, and hiding her
face in her hands, as if to shut out all view of the dreary though
altered scenes which spread before her eyes.

Woeful thoughts and recollections now moved within her in bewildering
confusion.  All that she had suffered since Ulpius had dragged her from
the farm-house in the suburbs--the night pilgrimage over the plain--the
fearful passage through the wall--revived in her memory, mingled with
vague ideas, now for the first time aroused, of the plague and famine
that were desolating the city; and, with sudden apprehensions that
Goisvintha might still be following her, knife in hand, through the
lonely streets; while passively prominent over all these varying
sources of anguish and dread, the scene of the young chieftain's death
lay like a cold weight on her heavy heart.  The damp turf of his grave
seemed still to press against her breast; his last kiss yet trembled on
her lips; she knew, though she dared not look down on them, that the
spots of his blood yet stained her garments.

Whether she strove to rise and continue her flight; whether she
crouched down again under the portico, resigned for one bitter moment
to perish by the knife of Goisvintha--if Goisvintha were near; to fall
once more into the hands of Ulpius--if Ulpius were tracking her to her
retreat,--the crushing sense that she was utterly bereaved of her
beloved protector--that the friend of her brief days of happiness was
lost to her for ever--that Hermanric, who had preserved her from death,
had been murdered in his youth and his strength by her side, never
deserted her. Since the assassination in the farm-house, she was now
for the first time alone; and now for the first time she felt the full
severity of her affliction, and knew how dark was the blank which was
spread before every aspiration of her future life.

Enduring, almost eternal, as the burden of her desolation seemed now to
have become, it was yet to be removed, ere long, by feelings of a
tenderer mournfulness and a more resigned woe.  The innate and innocent
fortitude of disposition, which had made her patient under the rigour
of her youthful education, and hopeful under the trials that assailed
her on her banishment from her father's house; which had never deserted
her until the awful scenes of the past night of assassination and death
rose in triumphant horror before her eyes; and which, even then, had
been suspended but not destroyed--was now destined to regain its
healing influence over her heart.  As she still cowered in her lonely
refuge, the final hope, the yearning dependence on a restoration to her
father's presence and her father's love, that had moved her over the
young chieftain's grave, and had prompted her last effort for freedom
when Ulpius had dragged her through the passage in the rifted wall,
suddenly revived.


Once more she arose, and looked forth on the desolate city and the
stormy sky, but now with mild and unshrinking eyes.  Her recollections
of the past grew tender in their youthful grief; her thoughts for the
future became patient, solemn, and serene.  Images of her first and her
last-left protector, of her old familiar home, of her garden solitude
on the Pincian Mount, spread beautiful before her imagination as
resting-places to her weary heart.  She descended the steps of the
summer-house with no apprehension of her enemies, no doubt of her
resolution; for she knew the beacon that was now to direct her onward
course.  The tears gathered full in her eyes as she passed into the
garden; but her step never faltered, her features never lost their
combined expression of tranquil sorrow and subdued hope.  So she once
more entered the perilous streets, and murmuring to herself, 'My
father! my father!' as if in those simple words lay the hand that was
to guide, and the providence that was to preserved her, she began to
trace her solitary way in the direction of the Pincian Mount.

It was a spectacle--touching, beautiful, even sublime--to see this
young girl, but a few hours freed, by perilous paths and by criminal
hands, from scenes which had begun in treachery, only to end in death,
now passing, resolute and alone, through the streets of a mighty city,
overwhelmed by all that is poignant in human anguish and hideous in
human crime.  It was a noble evidence of the strong power over the
world and the world's perils, with which the simplest affection may arm
the frailest being--to behold her thus pursuing her way, superior to
every horror of desolation and death that clogged her path,
unconsciously discovering in the softly murmured name of 'father',
which still fell at intervals from her lips, the pure purpose that
sustained her--the steady heroism that ever held her in her doubtful
course.  The storms of heaven poured over her head--the crimes and
sufferings of Rome darkened the paths of her pilgrimage; but she passed
firmly onward through all, like a ministering spirit, journeying along
earthly shores in the bright inviolability of its merciful mission and
its holy thoughts--like a ray of light living in the strength of its
own beauty, amid the tempest and obscurity of a stranger sphere.

Once more she entered the Campus Martius.  Again she passed the public
fountains, still unnaturally devoted to serve as beds for the dying and
as sepulchres for the dead; again she trod the dreary highways, where
the stronger among the famished populace yet paced hither and thither
in ferocious silence and unsocial separation.  No word was addressed,
hardly a look was directed to her, as she pursued her solitary course.
She was desolate among the desolate; forsaken among others abandoned
like herself.

The robber, when he passed her by, saw that she was worthless for the
interests of plunder as the poorest of the dying citizens around him.
The patrician, loitering feebly onward to the shelter of his palace
halls, avoided her as a new suppliant among the people for the charity
which he had not to bestow, and quickened his pace as she approached
him in the street.  Unprotected, yet unmolested, hurrying from her
loneliness and her bitter recollections to the refuge of her father's
love, as she would have hurried when a child from her first
apprehension of ill to the refuge of her father's arms, she gained at
length the foot of the Pincian Hill--at length ascended the streets so
often trodden in the tranquil days of old!

The portals and outer buildings of Vetranio's palace, as she passed
them, presented a striking and ominous spectacle.  Within the lofty
steel railings, which protected the building, the famine-wasted slaves
of the senator appeared reeling and tottering beneath full vases of
wine which they were feebly endeavouring to carry into the interior
apartments.  Gaudy hangings drooped from the balconies, garlands of ivy
were wreathed round the statues of the marble front.  In the midst of
the besieged city, and in impious mockery of the famine and pestilence
which were wasting it, hut and palace, to its remotest confines, were
proceeding in this devoted dwelling the preparations for a triumphant
feast!

Unheedful of the startling prospect presented by Vetranio's abode, her
eyes bent but in one absorbing direction, her steps hurrying faster and
faster with each succeeding instant, Antonina approached the home from
which she had been exiled in fear, and to which she was returning in
woe.  Yet a moment more of strong exertion, of overpowering
anticipation, and she reached the garden gate!

She dashed back the heavy hair matted over her brows by the rain; she
glanced rapidly around her; she beheld the window of her bed-chamber
with the old simple curtain still hanging at its accustomed place; she
saw the well-remembered trees, the carefully tended flower-beds, now
drooping mournfully beneath the gloomy sky.  Her heart swelled within
her, her breath seemed suddenly arrested in her bosom, as she trod the
garden path and ascended the steps beyond.  The door at the top was
ajar.  With a last effort she thrust it open, and stood once
more--unaided and unwelcomed, yet hopeful of consolation, of pardon, of
love--within her first and last sanctuary, the walls of her home!




CHAPTER 21.

FATHER AND CHILD.

Forsaken as it appears on an outward view, during the morning of which
we now write, the house of Numerian is yet not tenantless.  In one of
the sleeping apartments, stretched on his couch, with none to watch by
its side, lies the master of the little dwelling.  We last beheld him
on the scene mingled with the famishing congregation in the Basilica of
St. John Lateran, still searching for his child amid the confusion of
the public distribution of food during the earlier stages of the
misfortunes of besieged Rome.  Since that time he has toiled and
suffered much; and now the day of exhaustion, long deferred, the hours
of helpless solitude, constantly dreaded, have at length arrived.

From the first periods of the siege, while all around him in the city
moved gloomily onward through darker and darker changes, while famine
rapidly merged into pestilence and death, while human hopes and
purposes gradually diminished and declined with each succeeding day, he
alone remained ever devoted to the same labour, ever animated by the
same object--the only one among all his fellow-citizens whom no outward
event could influence for good or evil, for hope or fear.

In every street of Rome, at all hours, among all ranks of people, he
was still to be seen constantly pursuing the same hopeless search.
When the mob burst furiously into the public granaries to seize the
last supplies of corn hoarded for the rich, he was ready at the doors
watching them as they came out.  When rows of houses were deserted by
all but the dead, he was beheld within, passing from window to window,
as he sought through each room for the treasure that he had lost.  When
some few among the populace, in the first days of the pestilence,
united in the vain attempt to cast over the lofty walls the corpses
that strewed the street, he mingled with them to look on the rigid
faces of the dead.  In solitary places, where the parent, not yet lost
to affection, strove to carry his dying child from the desert roadway
to the shelter of a roof; where the wife, still faithful to her duties,
received her husband's last breath in silent despair--he was seen
gliding by their sides, and for one brief instant looking on them with
attentive and mournful eyes. Wherever he went, whatever he beheld, he
asked no sympathy and sought no aid.  He went his way, a pilgrim on a
solitary path, an unregarded expectant for a boon that no others would
care to partake.

When the famine first began to be felt in the city, he seemed
unconscious of its approach--he made no effort to procure beforehand
the provision of a few days' sustenance; if he attended the first
public distributions of food, it was only to prosecute his search for
his child amid the throng around him.  He must have perished with the
first feeble victims of starvation, had he not been met, during his
solitary wanderings, by some of the members of the congregation whom
his piety and eloquence had collected in former days.

By these persons, who entreaties that he would suspend his hopeless
search he always answered with the same firm and patient denial, his
course was carefully watched and his wants anxiously provided for.  Out
of every supply of food which they were enabled to collect, his share
was invariably carried to his abode.  They remembered their teacher in
the hour of his dejection, as they had formerly reverenced him in the
day of his vigour; they toiled to preserve his life as anxiously as
they had laboured to profit by his instructions; they listened as his
disciples once, they served him as his children now.

But over these, as over all other offices of human kindness, the famine
was destined gradually and surely to prevail.  The provision of food
garnered up by the congregation ominously lessened with each succeeding
day.  When the pestilence began darkly to appear, the numbers of those
who sought their afflicted teacher at his abode, or followed him
through the dreary streets, fatally decreased.


Then, as the nourishment which had supported, and the vigilance which
had watched him, thus diminished, so did the hard-tasked energies of
the unhappy father fail him faster and faster.  Each morning as he
arose, his steps were more feeble, his heart grew heavier within him,
his wanderings through the city were less and less resolute and
prolonged. At length his powers totally deserted him; the last-left
members of his congregation, as they approached his abode with the
last-left provision of food which they possessed, found him prostrate
with exhaustion at his garden gate.  They bore him to his couch, placed
their charitable offering by his side, and leaving one of their number
to protect him from the robber and the assassin, they quitted the house
in despair.

For some days the guardian remained faithful to his post, until his
sufferings from lack of food overpowered his vigilance.  Dreading that,
in his extremity, he might be tempted to take from the old man's small
store of provision what little remained, he fled from the house, to
seek sustenance, however loathsome, in the public streets; and
thenceforth Numerian was left defenceless in his solitary abode.

He was first beheld on the scenes which these pages present, a man of
austere purpose, of unwearied energy; a valiant reformer, who defied
all difficulties that beset him in his progress; a triumphant teacher,
leading at his will whoever listened to his words; a father, proudly
contemplating the future position which he destined for his child.  Far
different did he now appear.  Lost to his ambition, broken in spirit,
helpless in body, separated from his daughter by his own act, he lay on
his untended couch in a death-like lethargy.  The cold wind blowing
through his opened window awakened no sensations in his torpid frame;
the cup of water and the small relics of coarse food stood near his
hand, but he had no vigilance to discern them.  His open eyes looked
steadfastly upward, and yet he reposed as one in a deep sleep, or as
one already devoted to the tomb; save when, at intervals, his lips
moved slowly with a long and painfully drawn breath, or a fever flush
tinged his hollow cheek with changing and momentary hues.

While thus in outward aspect appearing to linger between life and
death, his faculties yet remained feebly vital within him.  Aroused by
no external influence, and governed by no mental restraint, they now
created before him a strange waking vision, palpable as an actual event.

It seemed to him that he was reposing, not in his own chamber, but in
some mysterious world, filled with a twilight atmosphere, inexpressibly
soothing and gentle to his aching sight.  Through this mild radiance he
could trace, at long intervals, shadowy representations of the scenes
through which he had passed in search of his lost child.  The gloomy
streets, the lonely houses abandoned to the unburied dead, which he had
explored, alternately appeared and vanished before him in solemn
succession; and ever and anon, as one vision disappeared ere another
rose, he heard afar off a sound as of gentle, womanly voices, murmuring
in solemn accents, 'The search has been made in penitence, in patience,
in prayer, and has not been pursued in vain.  The lost shall
return--the beloved shall yet be restored!'

Thus, as it had begun, the vision long continued.  Now the scenes
through which he had wandered passed slowly before his eyes, now the
soft voices murmured pityingly in his ear.  At length the first
disappeared, and the last became silent; then ensued a long vacant
interval, and then the grey, tranquil light brightened slowly at one
spot, out of which he beheld advancing towards him the form of his lost
child.

She came to his side, she bent lovingly over him; he saw her eyes, with
their old patient, childlike expression, looking sorrowfully down upon
him.  His heart revived to a sense of unspeakable awe and contrition,
to emotions of yearning love and mournful hope; his speech returned; he
whispered tremulously, 'Child! child! I repented in bitter woe the
wrong that I did to thee; I sought thee, in my loneliness on earth,
through the long day and the gloomy night!  And now the merciful God
has sent thee to pardon me!  I loved thee; I wept for thee.'


His voice died within him, for now his outward sensations quickened.
He felt warm tears falling on his cheeks; he felt embracing arms
clasped round him; he heard tenderly repeated, 'Father! speak to me as
you were wont; love me, father, and forgive me, as you loved and
forgave me when I was a little child!'

The sound of that well-remembered voice--which had ever spoken kindly
and reverently to him;  which had last addressed him in tones of
despairing supplication; which he had hardly hoped to hear again on
earth--penetrated his whole being, like awakening music in the dead
silence of night.  His eyes lost their vacant expression; he raised
himself suddenly on the couch; he saw that what had begun as a vision
had ended as a reality; that his dream had proved the immediate
fore-runner of its own fulfilment; that his daughter in her bodily
presence was indeed restored; and his head drooped forward, and he
trembled and wept upon her bosom, in the overpowering fulness of his
gratitude and delight.

For some moments Antonina, calming with the resolute heroism of
affection her own thronging emotions of awe and affright, endeavoured
to soothe and support her fast-failing parent.  Her horror almost
overwhelmed her, as she thought that now, when, through grief and
peril, she was at last restored to him, he might expire in her arms;
but even yet her resolution did not fail her.  The last hope of her
brief and bitter life was now the hope of reviving her father, and she
clung to it with the tenacity of despair.

She calmed her voice while she spoke to him; she entreated him to
remember that his daughter had returned to watch over him, to be his
obedient pupil as in days of old.  Vain effort!  Even while the words
passed her lips, his arms, which had been pressed over her, relaxed;
his head grew heavier on her bosom.  In the despair of the moment, she
tore herself from him, and looked round to seek the help that none were
near to afford.  The cup of water, the last provision of food,
attracted her eye. With quick instinct she caught them up.  Hope,
success, salvation, lay in those miserable relics.  She pressed the
food into his mouth; she moistened his parched lips, his dry brow, with
the water.  During one moment of horrible suspense she saw him still
insensible; then the vital functions revived; his eyes opened again and
fixed famine-struck on the wretched nourishment before him.  He
devoured it ravenously; he drained the cup of water to its last drop;
he sank back again on the couch. But now the torpid blood moved once
more in his veins; his heart beat less and less feebly:  he was saved.
She saw it as she bent over him--saved by the lost child in the hour of
her return!  It was a sensation of ecstatic triumph and gratitude which
no woeful remembrances had power to embitter in its bright, sudden
birth.  She knelt down by the side of the couch, almost crushed by her
own emotions.  Over the grave of the young warrior she had raised her
heart to Heaven in agony and grief, and now by her father's side she
poured forth her whole soul to her Creator in trembling ejaculations of
thankfulness and hope.

Thus--the one slowly recovering whatever of life and vigour yet
continued in his weakened frame, the other still filled with her
all-absorbing emotions of gratitude--the father and daughter long
remained. And now, as morning waned towards noon, the storm began to
subside. Gradually and solemnly the vast thunder-clouds rolled asunder,
and the bright blue heaven beyond appeared through their fantastic
rifts.  The lessening rain-drops fell light and silvery to the earth,
and breeze and sunshine were wafted at fitful intervals over the
plague-tainted atmosphere of Rome.  As yet, subdued by the shadows of
the floating clouds, the dawning sunbeams glittered softly through the
windows of Numerian's chamber.  They played, warm and reviving, over
his worn features, like messengers of resurrection and hope from their
native heaven.  Life seemed to expand within him under their fresh and
gentle ministering.  Once more he raised himself, and turned towards
his child; and now his heart throbbed with a healthful joy, and his
arms closed round her, not in the helplessness of infirmity, but in the
welcome of love.

His words, when he spoke to her, fell at first almost inarticulately
from his lips--they were mingled together in confused phrases of
tenderness, contrition, thanksgiving.  All the native enthusiasm of his
disposition, all the latent love for his child, which had for years
been suppressed by his austerity, or diverted by his ambition, now at
last burst forth.

Trembling and silent in his arms, Antonina vainly endeavoured to return
his caresses and to answer his words of welcome.  Now for the first
time she knew how deep was her father's affection for her; she felt how
foreign to his real nature had been his assumed severity in their
intercourse of former days; and in the quick flow of new feelings and
old recollections produced by the delighting surprise of the discovery,
she found herself speechless.  She could only listen eagerly,
breathlessly, while he spoke.  His words, faltering and confused though
they were, were words of endearment which she had never heard from him
before; they were words which no mother had ever pronounced beside her
infant bed, and they sank divinely consoling over her heart, as
messages of pardon from an angel's lips.

Gradually Numerian's voice grew calmer.  He raised his daughter in his
arms, and bent wistfully on her face his attentive and pitying eyes.
'Returned, returned!' he murmured, while he gazed on her, 'never again
to depart!  Returned, beautiful and patient, kinder and more tender
than ever!  Love me and pardon me, Antonina.  I sought for you in
bitter loneliness and despair.  Think not of me as what I was, but as
what I am!  There were days when you were an infant, when I had no
thought but how to cherish and delight you, and now those days have
come again.  You shall read no gloomy task-books; you shall never be
separated from me more; you shall play sweet music on the lute; you
shall be all garlanded with flowers which I will provide for you!  We
will find friends and glad companions; we will bring happiness with us
wherever we are seen. God's blessing goes forth from children like
you--it has fallen upon me--it has raised me from the dead!  My
Antonina shall teach me to worship, as I once taught her.  She shall
pray for me in the morning, and pray for me at night; and when she
thinks not of it, when she sleeps, I shall come softly to her bedside,
and wait and watch over her, so that when she opens her eyes they shall
open on me--they are the eyes of my child who has been restored to
me--there is nothing on earth that can speak to me like them of
happiness and peace!'

He paused for a moment, and looked rapturously on her face as it was
turned towards him.  His features partially saddened while he gazed,
and taking her long hair, still wet and dishevelled from the rain, in
his hands, he pressed it over his lips, over his face, over his neck.
Then, when he saw that she was endeavouring to speak, when he beheld
the tears that were now filling her eyes, he drew her closer to him,
and hurriedly continued in lower tones--

'Hush! hush!  No more grief, no more tears!  Tell me not whither you
have wandered--speak not of what you have suffered; for would not every
word be a reproach to me?  And you have come to pardon and not to
reproach!  Let not the recollection that it was I who cast you off be
forced on me from your lips; let us remember only that we are restored
to each other; let us think that God has accepted my penitence and
forgiven me my sin, in suffering my child to return!  Or, if we must
speak of the days of separation that are past, speak to me of the days
that found you tranquil and secure; rejoice me by telling me that it
was not all danger and woe in the bitter destiny which my guilty anger
prepared for my own child!  Say to me that you met protectors as well
as enemies in the hour of your flight--that all were not harsh to you
as I was--that those of whom you asked shelter and safety looked on
your face as on a petition for charity and kindness from friends whom
they loved! Tell me only of your protectors, Antonina, for in that
there will be consolation; and you have come to console!'

As he waited for her reply he felt her tremble on his bosom, he saw the
shudder that ran over her frame.  The despair in her voice, though she
only pronounced in answer to him the simple words, 'There was one'--and
then ceased, unable to proceed--penetrated coldly to his heart.

'Is he not at hand?' he hurriedly resumed.  'Why is he not here?  Let
us seek him without delay.  I must humble myself before him in my
gratitude.  I must show him that I was worthy that my Antonina should
be restored.'


'He is dead!' she gasped, sinking down in the arms that embraced her,
as the recollections of the past night again crowded in all their
horror on her memory.  'They murdered him by my side.  O father!
father! he loved me; he would have reverenced and protected you!'

'May the merciful God receive him among the blessed angels, and honour
him among the holy martyrs!' cried the father, raising his tearful eyes
in supplication.  'May his spirit, if it can still be observant of the
things of earth, know that his name shall be written on my heart with
the name of my child; that I will think on him as on a beloved
companion, and mourn for him as a son that has been taken from me!'

He ceased, and looked down on Antonina, whose features were still
hidden from him.  Each felt that a new bond of mutual affection had
been created between them by what each had spoken; but both now
remained silent.

During this interval the thoughts of Numerian wandered from the
reflections which had hitherto occupied him.  The few mournful words
which his daughter had spoken had been sufficient to banish its fulness
of joy from his heart, and to turn him from the happy contemplation of
the present to the dark recollections of the past.  Vague doubts and
fears now mingled with his gratitude and hope, and involuntarily his
thoughts reverted to what he would fain have forgotten for ever--to the
morning when he had driven Antonina from her home.

Baseless apprehensions of the return of the treacherous Pagan and his
profligate employer, with the return of their victim--despairing
convictions of his own helplessness and infirmity rose startlingly in
his mind.  His eyes wandered vacantly round the room, his hands closed
trembling over his daughter's form; then, suddenly releasing her, he
arose as one panic-stricken, and exclaiming, 'The doors must be
secured--Ulpius may be near--the senator may return!' endeavoured to
cross the room.  But his strength was unequal to the effort; he leaned
back for support against the wall, and breathlessly repeating, 'Secure
the doors--Ulpius, Ulpius!' he motioned to Antonina to descend.

She trembled as she obeyed him.  Remembering her passage through the
breach in the wall, and her fearful journey through the streets of
Rome, she more than shared her father's apprehensions as she descended
the stairs.

The door remained half open, as she had left it when she entered the
house.  Ere she hurriedly closed and barred it, she cast a momentary
glance on the street beyond.  The gaunt figures of the slaves still
moved wearily to and fro, amid the mockery of festal preparation in
Vetranio's palace; and here and there a few ghastly figures lay on the
ground contemplating them in languid amazement. Over all other parts of
the street the deadly tranquillity of plague and famine still prevailed.

Hurriedly ascending the steps, Antonina hastened to assure her father
that she had obeyed his commands, and that they were now secure from
all intrusion from without.  But, during her brief absence, a new and
more ominous prospect of calamity had presented itself before the old
man's mind.

As she entered the room, she saw that he had returned to his couch, and
that he was holding before him the little wooden bowl which had
contained his last supply of food, and which was now empty. He
addressed not a word to her when he heard her enter; his features were
rigid with horror and despair as he looked down on the empty bowl; he
muttered vacantly, 'It was the last provision that remained, and it was
I that exhausted it!  The beasts of the forest carry food to their
young, and I have taken the last morsel from my child!'


In an instant the utter desolateness of their situation--forgotten in
the first joy of their meeting--forced itself with appalling vividness
upon Antonina's mind.  She endeavoured to speak of comfort and hope to
her father; but the fearful realities of the famine in the city now
rose palpably before her, and suspended the vain words of solace on her
lips. In the midst of still populous Rome, within sight of those
surrounding plains where the creative sun ripened hour by hour the
vegetation of the teeming earth, where field and granary displayed
profusely their abundant stores, the father and daughter now looked on
each other, as helpless to replace their exhausted provision of food as
if they had been abandoned on the raft of the shipwrecked in an
unexplored sea, or banished to a lonely island whose inland products
were withered by infected winds, and around whose arid shores ran such
destroying waters as seethe over the 'Cities of the Plain'.

The silence which had long prevailed in the room, the bitter
reflections which still held the despairing father and the patient
daughter speechless alike, were at length interrupted by a hollow and
melancholy voice from the street, pronouncing, in the form of a public
notice, these words:--

'I, Publius Dalmatius, messenger of the Roman Senate, proclaim, that in
order to clear the streets from the dead, three thousand sestertii will
be given by the Prefect for every ten bodies that are cast over the
walls.  This is the true decree of the Senate.'

The voice ceased; but no sound of applause, no murmur of popular tumult
was heard in answer. Then, after an interval, it was once more faintly
audible as the messenger passed on and repeated the decree in another
street; and then the silence again sank down over all things more
awfully pervading than before.

Every word of the proclamation, when repeated in the distance as when
spoken under his window, had clearly reached Numerian's ears.  His
mind, already sinking in despair, was riveted on what he had heard from
the woe-boding voice of the herald, with a fascination as absorbing as
that which rivets the eye of the traveller, already giddy on the summit
of a precipice, upon the spectacle of the yawning gulfs beneath.  When
all sound of the proclamation had finally died away, the unhappy father
dropped the empty bowl which he had hitherto mechanically continued to
hold before him, and glancing affrightedly at his daughter, groaned to
himself:  'The corpses are to be cast over the walls--the dead are to
be flung forth to the winds of heaven--there is no help for us in the
city. O God, God!--she may die!--her body may be cast away like the
rest, and I may live to see it!'

He rose suddenly from the couch; his reason seemed for a moment to be
shaken as he tottered to the window, crying, 'Food! food!--I will give
my house and all it contains for a morsel of food.  I have nothing to
support my own child--she will starve before me by tomorrow if I have
no food!  I am a citizen of Rome--I demand help from the Senate!  Food!
food!'

In tones declining lower and lower he continued to cry thus from the
window, but no voice answered him either in sympathy or derision.  Of
all the people--now increased in numbers--collected in the street
before Vetranio's palace, no one turned even to look on him.  For days
and days past, such fruitless appeals as his had been heard, and heard
unconcernedly, at every hour and in every street of Rome--now ringing
through the heavy air in the shrieks of delirium; now faintly audible
in the last faltering murmurs of exhaustion and despair.

Thus vainly entreating help and pity from a populace who had ceased to
give the one or to feel the other, Numerian might long have remained;
but now his daughter approached his side, and drawing him gently
towards his couch, said in tender and solemn accents:  'Remember,
father, that God sent the ravens to feed Elijah, and replenished the
widow's cruse! He will not desert us, for He has restored us to each
other, and has sent me hither not to perish in the famine, but to watch
over you!'


'God has deserted the city and all that it contains!' he answered
distractedly.  'The angel of destruction has gone forth into our
streets, and death walks in his shadow!  On this day, when hope and
happiness seemed opening before us both; our little household has been
doomed!  The young and the old, the weary and the watchful, they strew
the streets alike--the famine has mastered them all--the famine will
master us--there is no help, no escape!  I, who would have died
patiently for my daughter's safety, must now die despairing, leaving
her friendless in the wide, dreary, perilous world; in the dismal city
of anguish, of horror, of death--where the enemy threatens without, and
hunger and pestilence waste within!  O Antonina! you have returned to
me but for a little time; the day of our second separation draws near!'

For a few moments his head drooped, and his sobs choked his utterance;
then he once more rose painfully to his feet.  Heedless of Antonina's
entreaties, he again endeavoured to cross the room, only again to find
his feeble powers unequal to sustain him.  As he fell back panting upon
a seat, his eyes assumed a wild, unnatural expression--despair of mind
and weakness of body had together partially unhinged his faculties.
When his daughter affrightedly approached to soothe and succour him, he
impatiently waved her back; and began to speak in a dull, hoarse,
monotonous voice, pressing his hand firmly over his brow, and directing
his eyes backwards and forwards incessantly, on object after object, in
every part of the room.

'Listen, child, listen!' he hastily began.  'I tell you there is no
food in the house, and no food in Rome!--we are besieged--they have
taken from us our granaries in the suburbs, and our fields on the
plains--there is a great famine in the city--those who still eat, eat
strange food which men sicken at when it is named.  I would seek even
this, but I have no strength to go forth into the byways and force it
from others at the point of the sword!  I am old and feeble, and
heart-broken--I shall die first, and leave fatherless my good, kind
daughter, whom I sought for so long, and whom I loved as my only child!'

He paused for an instant, not to listen to the words of encouragement
and hope which Antonina mechanically addressed to him while he spoke,
but to collect his wandering thoughts, to rally his failing strength.
His voice acquired a quicker tone, and his features presented a sudden
energy and earnestness of expression, as if some new project had
flashed across his mind, when, after an interval, he continued thus:--

'But though my child shall be bereaved of me, though I shall die in the
hour when I most longed to live for her, I must not leave her helpless;
I will send her among my congregation who have deserted me, but who
will repent when they hear that I am dead, and will receive Antonina
among them for my sake!  Listen to this--listen, listen!  You must tell
them to remember all that I once revealed to them of my brother, from
whom I parted in my boyhood--my brother, whom I have never seen since.
He may yet be alive, he may be found--they must search for him; for to
you he would be father to the fatherless, and guardian to the
unguarded--he may now be in Rome, he may be rich and powerful--he may
have food to spare, and shelter that is good against all enemies and
strangers!  Attend, child, to my words:  in these latter days I have
thought of him much; I have seen him in dreams as I saw him for the
last time in my father's house; he was happier and more beloved than I
was, and in envy and hatred I quitted my parents and parted from him.
You have heard nothing of this; but you must hear it now, that when I
am dead you may know you have a protector to seek!  So I received in
anger my brother's farewell, and fled from my home--(those days were
well remembered by me once, but all things grow dull on my memory now).
Long years of turmoil and change passed on, and I never met him; and
men of many nations were my companions, but he was not among them; then
much affliction fell upon me, and I repented and learnt the fear of
God, and went back to my father's house.  Since that, years have
passed--I know not how many.  I could have told them when I spoke of my
former life to him--to my friend, when we stood near St. Peter's, ere
the city was besieged, looking on the sunset, and speaking of the early
days of our companionship; but now my very remembrance fails me; the
famine that threatens us with separation and death casts darkness over
my thoughts; yet hear me, hear me patiently--for your sake I must
continue!'

'Not now, father--not now!  At another time, on a happier day!'
murmured Antonina, in tremulous, entreating tones.


'My home, when I arrived to look on it, was gone,' pursued the old man
sadly, neither heeding nor hearing her.  'Other houses were built where
my father's house had stood; no man could tell me of my parents and my
brother; then I returned, and my former companions grew hateful in my
eyes; I left them, and they followed me with persecution and
scorn.--Listen, listen!--I set forth secretly in the night, with you,
to escape them, and to make perfect my reformation where they should
not be near to hinder it; and we travelled onward many days until we
came to Rome, and I made my abode there.  But I feared that my
companions whom I abhorred might discover and persecute me again, and
in the new city of my dwelling I called myself by another name than the
name that I bore; thus I knew that all trace of me would be lost, and
that I should be kept secure from men whom I thought on only as enemies
now.  Go, child! go quickly!--bring your tablets and write down the
names that I shall tell you; for so you will discover your protector
when I am gone!  Say not to him that you are the child of Numerian--he
knows not the name; say that you are the daughter of Cleander, his
brother, who died longing to be restored to him.  Write--write
carefully, Cleander!--that was the name my father gave to me; that was
the name I bore until I fled from my evil companions and changed it,
dreading their pursuit!  Cleander! write and remember, Cleander!  I
have seen in visions that my brother shall be discovered:  he will not
be discovered to me, but he will be discovered to you!  Your
tablets--your tablets!--write his name with mine--it is--'

He stopped abruptly.  His mental powers, fluctuating between torpor and
animation--shaken, but not overpowered by the trials which had assailed
them--suddenly rallied, and resuming somewhat of their accustomed
balance, became awakened to a sense of their own aberration.  His vague
revelations of his past life (which the reader will recognise as
resembling his communications on the same subject to the fugitive
land-owner, previously related) now appeared before him in all their
incongruity and uselessness.  His countenance fell--he sighed bitterly
to himself:  'My reason begins to desert me!--my judgment, which should
guide my child--my resolution, which should uphold her, both fail me!
How should my brother, since childhood lost to me, be found by her?
Against the famine that threatens us I offer but vain words!  Already
her strength declines; her face, that I loved to look on grows wan
before my eyes!  God have mercy upon us!--God have mercy upon us!'

He returned feebly to his couch; his head declined on his bosom;
sometimes a low groan burst from his lips, but he spoke no more.

Deep as was the prostration under which he had now fallen, it was yet
less painful to Antonina to behold it than to listen to the incoherent
revelations which had fallen from his lips but the moment before, and
which, in her astonishment and affright, she had dreaded might be the
awful indications of the overthrow of her father's reason.  As she
again placed herself by his side, she trembled to feel that her own
weariness was fast overpowering her; but she still struggled with her
rising despair--still strove to think only of capacity for endurance
and chances of relief.

The silence in the room was deep and dismal while they now sat
together. The faint breezes, at long intervals, drowsily rose and fell
as they floated through the open window; the fitful sunbeams
alternately appeared and vanished as the clouds rolled upward in airy
succession over the face of heaven.  Time moved sternly in its destined
progress, and Nature varied tranquilly through its appointed limits of
change, and still no hopes, no saving projects, nothing but dark
recollections and woeful anticipations occupied Antonina's mind; when,
just as her weary head was drooping towards the ground, just as
sensation and fortitude and grief itself seemed declining into a
dreamless and deadly sleep, a last thought, void of discernible
connection or cause, rose suddenly within her--animating, awakening,
inspiring.  She started up.  'The garden, father--the garden!' she
cried breathlessly.  'Remember the food that grows in our garden below!
Be comforted, we have provision left yet--God has not deserted us!'

He raised his face while she spoke; his features assumed a deeper
mournfulness and hopelessness of expression; he looked upon her in
ominous silence, and laid his trembling fingers on her arm to detain
her, when she hurriedly attempted to quit the room.


'Do not forbid me to depart,' she anxiously pleaded.  'To me every
corner in the garden is known; for it was my possession in our happier
days--our last hopes rest in the garden, and I must search through it
without delay!  Bear with me,' she added, in low and melancholy
tones--'bear with me, dear father, in all that I would now do!  I have
suffered, since we parted, a bitter affliction, which clings dark and
heavy to all my thoughts--there is no consolation for me but the
privilege of caring for your welfare--my only hope of comfort is in the
employment of aiding you!'

The old man's hand had pressed heavier on her arm while she addressed
him; but when she ceased it dropped from her, and he bent his head in
speechless submission to her entreaty.

For one moment she lingered, looking on him silent as himself; the
next, she left the apartment with hasty and uncertain steps.

On reaching the garden, she unconsciously took the path leading to the
bank where she had once loved to play secretly upon her lute and to
look on the distant mountains reposing in the warm atmosphere which
summer evenings shed over their blue expanse.  How eloquent was this
little plot of ground of the quiet events now for ever gone by!--of the
joys, the hopes, the happy occupations, which rise with the day that
chronicles them, and pass like that day, never to return the
same!--which the memory alone can preserve as they were, and the heart
can never resume but in a changed form, divested of the presence of the
companion of the incident of the departed moment, which formed the
charm of the past and makes the imperfection of the present.

Tender and thronging were the remembrances which the surrounding
prospect called up, as the sad mistress of the garden looked again on
her little domain!  She saw the bank where she could never more sit to
sing with a renewal of the same feelings which had once inspired her
music; she saw the drooping flowers that she could never restore with
the same childlike enjoyment of the task which had animated her in
former hours!  Young though she still was, the emotions of the youthful
days that were gone could never be revived as they had once existed!
As waters they had welled up, and as waters they had flowed forth,
never to return to their source!  Thoughts of these former years--of
the young warrior who lay cold beneath the heavy earth--of the
desponding father who mourned hopeless in the room above--gathered
thick at her heart as she turned from her flower-beds--not, as in other
days, to pour forth her happiness to the music of her lute, but to
search laboriously for the sustenance of life.

At first, as she stooped over those places in the garden where she knew
that fruits and vegetables had been planted by her own hand, her tears
blinded her.  She hastily dashed them away, and looked eagerly around.

Alas! others had reaped the field from which she had hoped abundance!
In the early days of the famine Numerian's congregation had entered the
garden, and gathered for him whatever it contained; its choicest and
its homeliest products were alike exhausted; withered leaves lay on the
barren earth, and naked branches waved over them in the air.  She
wandered from path to path, searching amid the briars and thistles,
which already cast an aspect of ruin over the deserted place; she
explored its most hidden corners with the painful perseverance of
despair; but the same barrenness spread around her wherever she turned.
On this once fertile spot, which she had entered with such joyful faith
in its resources, there remained but a few poor decayed roots, dropped
and forgotten amid tangled weeds and faded flowers.

She saw that they were barely sufficient for one scanty meal as she
collected them and returned slowly to the house.  No words escaped her,
no tears flowed over her cheeks when she reascended the steps--hope,
fear, thought, sensation itself had been stunned within her from the
first moment when she had discovered that, in the garden as in the
house, the inexorable famine had anticipated the last chances of relief.

She entered the room, and, still holding the withered roots, advanced
mechanically to her father's side.  During her absence his mental and
bodily faculties had both yielded to wearied nature--he lay in a deep,
heavy sleep.


Her mind experienced a faint relief when she saw that the fatal
necessity of confessing the futility of the hopes she had herself
awakened was spared her for a while.  She knelt down by Numerian, and
gently smoothed the hair over his brow; then she drew the curtain
across the window, for she feared even that the breeze blowing through
it might arouse him.

A strange, secret satisfaction at the idea of devoting to her father
every moment of the time and every particle of the strength that might
yet be reserved for her; a ready resignation to death in dying for
him--overspread her heart, and took the place of all other aspirations
and all other thoughts.

She now moved to and fro through the room with a cautious tranquillity
which nothing could startle; she prepared her decayed roots for food
with a patient attention which nothing could divert.  Lost, through the
aggravated miseries of her position, to recent grief and present
apprehension, she could still instinctively perform the simple offices
of the woman and the daughter, as she might have performed them amid a
peaceful nation and a prosperous home.  Thus do the first-born
affections outlast the exhaustion of all the stormy emotions, all the
aspiring thoughts of after years, which may occupy, but which cannot
absorb, the spirit within us; thus does their friendly and familiar
voice, when the clamour of contending passions has died away in its own
fury, speak again, serene and sustaining as in the early time, when the
mind moved secure within the limits of its native simplicity, and the
heart yet lay happy in the pure tranquillity of its first repose!

The last scanty measure of food was soon prepared; it was bitter and
unpalatable when she tasted it--life could barely be preserved, even in
the most vigorous, by provision so wretched; but she set it aside as
carefully as if it had been the most precious luxury of the most
abundant feast.

Nothing had changed during the interval of her solitary employment--her
father yet slept; the gloomy silence yet prevailed in the street.  She
placed herself at the window, and partially drew aside the curtain to
let the warm breezes from without blow over her cold brow.  The same
ineffable resignation, the same unnatural quietude, which had sunk down
over her faculties since she had entered the room, overspread them
still.  Surrounding objects failed to impress her attention;
recollections and forebodings stagnated in her mind.  A marble
composure prevailed over her features.  Sometimes her eyes wandered
mechanically from the morsels of food by her side to her sleeping
father, as her one vacant idea of watching for his service, till the
feeble pulses of life had throbbed their last, alternately revived and
declined; but no other evidences of bodily existence or mental activity
appeared in her.  As she now sat in the half-darkened room, by the
couch on which her father reposed--her features pale, calm, and rigid,
her form enveloped in cold white drapery--there were moments when she
looked like one of the penitential devotees of the primitive Church,
appointed to watch in the house of mourning, and surprised in her
saintly vigil by the advent of Death.

Time flowed on--the monotonous hours of the day waned again towards
night; and plague and famine told their lapse in the fated highways of
Rome.  For father and child the sand in the glass was fast running out,
and neither marked it as it diminished.  The sleeper still reposed, and
the guardian by his side still watched; but now her weary gaze was
directed on the street, unconsciously attracted by the sound of voices
which at length rose from it at intervals, and by the light of the
torches and lamps which appeared in the great palace of the senator
Vetranio, as the sun gradually declined in the horizon, and the fiery
clouds around were quenched in the vapours of the advancing night.
Steadily she looked upon the sight beneath and before her; but even yet
her limbs never moved; no expression relieved the blank, solemn
peacefulness of her features.

Meanwhile, the soft, brief twilight glimmered over the earth, and
showed the cold moon, poised solitary in the starless heaven; then, the
stealthy darkness arose at her pale signal, and closed slowly round the
City of Death!



CHAPTER 22.

THE BANQUET OF FAMINE.

Of all prophecies, none are, perhaps, so frequently erroneous as those
on which we are most apt to venture in endeavouring to foretell the
effect of outward events on the characters of men.  In no form of our
anticipations are we more frequently baffled than in such attempts to
estimate beforehand the influence of circumstance over conduct, not
only in others, but also even in ourselves.  Let the event but happen,
and men, whom we view by the light of our previous observation of them,
act under it as the living contradictions of their own characters.  The
friend of our daily social intercourse, in the progress of life, and
the favourite hero of our historic studies, in the progress of the
page, astonish, exceed, or disappoint our expectations alike.  We find
it as vain to foresee a cause as to fix a limit for the arbitrary
inconsistencies in the dispositions of mankind.

But, though to speculate upon the future conduct of others under
impending circumstances be but too often to expose the fallacy of our
wisest anticipations, to contemplate the nature of that conduct after
it has been displayed is a useful subject of curiosity, and may perhaps
be made a fruitful source of instruction.  Similar events which succeed
each other at different periods are relieved from monotony, and derive
new importance from the ever-varying effects which they produce on the
human character.  Thus, in the great occurrence which forms the
foundation of our narrative, we may find little in the siege of Rome,
looking at it as a mere event, to distinguish it remarkably from any
former siege of the city--the same desire for glory and vengeance,
wealth and dominion, which brought Alaric to her walls, brought other
invaders before him.  But if we observed the effect of the Gothic
descent upon Italy on the inhabitants of her capital, we shall find
ample matter for novel contemplation and unbounded surprise.

We shall perceive, as an astonishing instance of the inconsistencies of
the human character, the spectacle of a whole people resolutely defying
an overwhelming foreign invasion at their very doors, just at the
period when they had fallen most irremediably from the highest position
of national glory to the lowest depths of national degradation;
resisting an all-powerful enemy with inflexible obstinacy, for the
honour of the Roman name, which they had basely dishonoured or
carelessly forgotten for ages past.  We shall behold men who have
hitherto laughed at the very name of patriotism, now starving
resolutely in their country's cause; who stopped at no villainy to
obtain wealth, now hesitating to employ their ill-gotten gains in the
purchase of the most important of all gratifications--their own
security and peace.  Instances of the unimaginable effect produced by
the event of the siege of Rome on the characters of her inhabitants
might be drawn from all classes, from the lowest to the highest, from
patrician to plebeian; but to produce them here would be to admit too
long an interruption in the progress of the present narrative.  If we
are to enter at all into detail on such a subject, it must be only in a
case clearly connected with the actual requirements of our story; and
such a case may be found, at this juncture, in the conduct of the
senator Vetranio, under the influence of the worst calamities attending
the blockade of Rome by the Goths.

Who, it may be asked, knowing the previous character of this man, his
frivolity of disposition, his voluptuous anxiety for unremitting
enjoyment and ease, his horror of the slightest approaches of
affliction or pain, would have imagined him capable of rejecting in
disdain all the minor chances of present security and future prosperity
which his unbounded power and wealth might have procured for him, even
in a famine-stricken city, and rising suddenly to the sublime of
criminal desperation, in the resolution to abandon life as worthless
the moment it had ceased to run in the easy current of all former
years?  Yet to this determination had he now arrived; and, still more
extraordinary, in this determination had he found others, of his own
patrician order, to join him.


The reader will remember his wild announcement of his intended orgie to
the Prefect Pompeianus during the earlier periods of the siege; that
announcement was now to be fulfilled.  Vetranio had bidden his guests
to the Banquet of Famine.  A chosen number of the senators of the great
city were to vindicate their daring by dying the revellers that they
had lived; by resigning in contempt all prospect of starving, like the
common herd, on a lessening daily pittance of loathsome food; by making
their triumphant exit from a fettered and ungrateful life, drowned in
floods of wine, and lighted by the fires of the wealthiest palace of
Rome!

It had been intended to keep this frantic determination a profound
secret, to let the mighty catastrophe burst upon the remaining
inhabitants of the city like a prodigy from heaven; but the slaves
intrusted with the organisation of the suicide banquet had been bribed
to their tasks with wine, and in the carelessness of intoxication had
revealed to others whatever they heard within the palace walls.  The
news passed from mouth to mouth.  There was enough in the prospect of
beholding the burning palace and the drunken suicide of its desperate
guests to animate even the stagnant curiosity of a famishing mob.

On the appointed evening the people dragged their weary limbs from all
quarters of the city towards the Pincian Hill.  Many of them died on
the way;  many lost their resolution to proceed to the end of their
journey, and took shelter sullenly in the empty houses on the road;
many found opportunities for plunder and crime as they proceeded, which
tempted them from their destination; but many persevered in their
purpose--the living dragging the dying along with them, the desperate
driving the cowardly before them in malignant sport, until they gained
the palace gates.  It was by their voices, as they reached her ear from
the street, that the fast-sinking faculties of Antonina had been
startled, though not revived; and there, on the broad pavement, lay
these citizens of a fallen city--a congregation of pestilence and
crime--a starving and an awful band!

The moon, brightened by the increasing darkness, now clearly
illuminated the street, and revealed, in a narrow space, a various and
impressive scene.

One side of the roadway in which stood Vetranio's palace was occupied,
along each extremity, as far as the eye could reach at night, by the
groves and outbuildings attached to the senator's mansion. The palace
grounds, at the higher and farther end of the street--looking from the
Pincian Gate--crossed it by a wide archway, and then stretched
backward, until they joined the trees of the little garden of
Numerian's abode. In a line with this house, but separated from it by a
short space, stood a long row of buildings, let out floor by floor to
separate occupants, and towering to an unwieldy altitude; for in
ancient Rome, as in modern London, in consequence of the high price of
land in an over-populated city, builders could only secure space in a
dwelling by adding inconveniently to its height.  Beyond these
habitations rose the trees surrounding another patrician abode; and
beyond that the houses took a sudden turn, and nothing more was visible
in a straight line but the dusky, indefinite objects of the distant
view.


The whole appearance of the street before Vetranio's mansion, had it
been unoccupied by the repulsive groups now formed in it, would have
been eminently beautiful at the hours of which we now write.  The nobly
symmetrical frontage of the palace itself, with its graceful succession
of long porticoes and colossal statues, contrasted by the picturesquely
irregular appearance of the opposite dwelling of Numerian and the lofty
houses by its side; the soft, indistinct masses of foliage running
parallel along the upper ends of the street, terminated and connected
by the archway garden across the road, on which was planted a group of
tall pine-trees, rising in gigantic relief against the transparent sky;
the brilliant light streaming across the pavement from Vetranio's
gaily-curtained windows, immediately opposed by the tranquil moonlight
which lit the more distant view--formed altogether a prospect in which
the natural and the artificial were mingled together in the most
exquisite proportions--a prospect whose ineffable poetry and beauty
might, on any other night, have charmed the most careless eye and
exalted the most frivolous mind.  But now, overspread as it was by
groups of people gaunt with famine and hideous with disease; startled
as it was, at gloomy intervals, by contending cries of supplication,
defiance, and despair--its brightest beauties of Nature and Art
appeared but to shine with an aspect of bitter mockery around the human
misery which their splendour disclosed.

Upwards of a hundred people--mostly of the lowest orders--were
congregated before the senator's devoted dwelling.  Some few among them
passed slowly to and fro in the street, their figures gliding shadowy
and solemn through the light around them; but the greater number lay on
the pavement before the wall of Numerian's dwelling and the doorways of
the lofty houses by its side.  Illuminated by the full glare of the
light from the palace windows, these groups, huddled together in the
distorted attitudes of suffering and despair, assumed a fearful and
unearthly appearance.  Their shrivelled faces, their tattered clothing,
their wan forms, here prostrate, there half-raised, were bathed in a
steady red glow.  High above them, at the windows of the tall houses,
now tenanted in every floor by the dead, appeared a few figures (the
mercenary guardians of the dying within)  bending forward to look out
upon the palace opposite--their haggard faces showing pale in the clear
moonlight.  Sometimes their voices were heard calling in mockery to the
mass of people below to break down the strong steel gates of the
palace, and tear the full wine-cup from its master's lips. Sometimes
those beneath replied with execrations, which rose wildly mingled with
the wailing of women and children, the moans of the plague-stricken,
and the supplications of the famished to the slaves passing backwards
and forwards behind the palace railings for charity and help.

In the intervals, when the tumult of weak voices was partially lulled,
there was heard a dull, regular, beating sound, produced by those who
had found dry bones on their road to the palace, and were pounding them
on the pavement, in sheltered places, for food.  The wind, which had
been refreshing during the day, had changed at sunset, and now swept up
slowly over the street in hot, faint gusts, plague-laden, from the
East. Particles of the ragged clothing on some prostrate forms lying
most exposed in its course waved slowly to and fro, as it passed, like
banners planted by Death on the yielding defences of the citadel of
Life.  It wound through the open windows of the palace, hot and
mephitic, as if tainted with the breath of the foul and furious words
which it bore onward into the banqueting-hall of the senator's reckless
guests.  Driven over such scenes as now spread beneath it, it derived
from them a portentous significance; it seemed to blow like an
atmosphere exuded from the furnace-depths of centre earth, breathing
sinister warnings of some deadly convulsion in the whole fabric of
Nature over the thronged and dismal street.

Such was the prospect before the palace, and such the spectators
assembled in ferocious anxiety to behold the destruction of the
senator's abode.  Meanwhile, within the walls of the building, the
beginning of the fatal orgie was at hand.

It had been covenanted by the slaves (who, during the calamities in the
besieged city, had relaxed in their accustomed implicit obedience to
their master with perfect impunity), that, as soon as the last labours
of preparation were completed, they should be free to consult their own
safety by quitting the devoted palace.  Already some of the weakest and
most timid of their numbers might be seen passing out hastily into the
gardens by the back gates, like engineers who had fired a train, and
were escaping ere the explosion burst forth.  Those among the menials
who still remained in the palace were for the greater part occupied in
drinking from the vases of wine which had been placed before them, to
preserve to the last moment their failing strength.


The mockery of festivity had been extended even to their dresses--green
liveries girt with cherry-coloured girdles arrayed their wasted forms.
They drank in utter silence.  Not the slightest appearance of revelry
or intoxication prevailed among their ranks.  Confusedly huddled
together, as if for mutual protection, they ever and anon cast quick
glances of suspicion and apprehension upon some six or eight of the
superior attendants of the palace, who walked backwards and forwards at
the outer extremity of the hall occupied by their comrades, and
occasionally advancing along the straight passages before them to the
front gates of the building, appeared to be exchanging furtive signals
with some of the people in the street.  Reports had been vaguely spread
of a secret conspiracy between some of the principal of the slaves and
certain chosen ruffians of the populace, to murder all the inmates of
the palace, seize on its treasures, and, opening the city gates to the
Goths, escape with their booty during the confusion of the pillage of
Rome.  Nothing had as yet been positively discovered; but the few
attendants who kept ominously apart from the rest were unanimously
suspected by their fellows, who now watched them over their wine-cups
with anxious eyes.  Different as was the scene among the slaves still
left in the palace from the scene among the people dispersed in the
street, the one was nevertheless in its own degree as gloomily
suggestive of some great impending calamity as the other.

The grand banqueting-hall of the palace, prepared though it now was for
festivity, wore a changed and melancholy aspect.

The massive tables still ran down the whole length of the noble room,
surrounded by luxurious couches, as in former days, but not a vestige
of food appeared upon their glittering surfaces.  Rich vases, flasks,
and drinking-cups, all filled with wine, alone occupied the festal
board. Above, hanging low from the ceiling, burnt ten large lamps,
corresponding to the number of guests assembled, as the only procurable
representatives of the hundreds of revellers who had feasted at
Vetranio's expense during the brilliant nights that were now passed for
ever.  At the lower end of the room, beyond the grand door of entrance,
hung a thick black curtain, apparently intended to conceal mysteriously
some object behind it.  Before the curtain burnt a small lamp of yellow
glass, raised upon a high gilt pole, and around and beneath it, heaped
against the side walls, and over part of the table, lay a various and
confused mass of rich objects, all of a nature more or less
inflammable, and all besprinkled with scented oils.  Hundreds of yards
of gorgeously variegated hangings, rolls upon rolls of manuscripts,
gaudy dresses of all colours, toys, utensils, innumerable articles of
furniture formed in rare and beautifully inlaid woods, were carelessly
flung together against the walls of the apartment, and rose high
towards its ceiling.

On every part of the tables not occupied by the vases of wine were laid
gold and jewelled ornaments which dazzled the eye by their brilliancy;
while, in extraordinary contrast to the magnificence thus profusely
displayed, there appeared in one of the upper corners of the hall an
old wooden stand covered by a coarse cloth, on which were placed one or
two common earthenware bowls, containing what my be termed a 'mash' of
boiled bran and salted horseflesh.  Any repulsive odour which might
have arisen from this strange compound was overpowered by the various
perfumes sprinkled about the room, which, mingling with the hot breezes
wafted through the windows from the street, produced an atmosphere as
oppressive and debilitating, in spite of its artificial allurements to
the sense of smell, as the air of a dungeon or the vapours of a marsh.

Remarkable as was the change in the present appearance of the
banqueting-hall, it was but the feeble reflection of the alteration for
the worse in the aspect of the host and his guests.  Vetranio reclined
at the head of the table, dressed in a scarlet mantle.  An embroidered
towel with purple tassels and fringes, connected with rings of gold,
fell over his breast, and silver and ivory bracelets were clasped round
his arms.  But of the former man the habiliments were all that
remained. His head was bent forward, as if with the weakness of age;
his emaciated arms seemed barely able to support the weight of the
ornaments which glittered on them; his eyes had contracted a wild,
unsettled expression; and a deadly paleness overspread the once plump
and jovial cheeks which so many mistresses had kissed in mercenary
rapture in other days.  Both in countenance and manner the elegant
voluptuary of our former acquaintance at the Court of Ravenna was
entirely and fatally changed. Of the other eight patricians who lay on
the couches around their altered host--some wild and reckless, some
gloomy and imbecile--all had suffered in the ordeal of the siege, the
famine, and the pestilence, like him.

Such were the members of the assemblage, represented from the ceiling
by nine of the burning lamps.  The tenth and last lamp indicated the
presence of one more guest who reclined a little apart from the rest.


This man was hump-backed; his gaunt, bony features were repulsively
disproportioned to his puny frame, which looked doubly contemptible,
enveloped as it was in an ample tawdry robe.  Sprung from the lowest
ranks of the populace, he had gradually forced himself into the favour
of his superiors by his skill in coarse mimicry, and his readiness in
ministering to the worst vices of all who would employ him.  Having
lost the greater part of his patrons during the siege, finding himself
abandoned to starvation on all sides, he had now, as a last resource,
obtained permission to participate in the Banquet of Famine, to enliven
it by a final exhibition of his buffoonery, and to die with his
masters, as he had lived with them--the slave, the parasite, and the
imitator of the lowest of their vices and the worst of their crimes.

At the commencement of the orgie, little was audible beyond the clash
of the wine-cups, the low occasional whispering of the revellers, and
the confused voices of the people without, floating through the window
from the street.  The desperate compact of the guests, now that its
execution had actually begun, awed them at first in spite of
themselves.  At length, when there was a lull of all sounds--when a
temporary calm prevailed over the noises outside--when the wine-cups
were emptied, and left for a moment ere they were filled
again--Vetranio feebly rose, and, announcing with a mocking smile that
he was about to speak a funeral oration over his friends and himself,
pointed to the wall immediately behind him as to an object fitted to
awaken the astonishment or the hilarity of his moody guests.

Against the upper part of the wall were fixed various small statues in
bronze and marble, all representing the owner of the palace, and all
hung with golden plates.  Beneath these appeared the rent-roll of his
estates, written in various colours on white vellum, and beneath that,
scratched on the marble in faint irregular characters, was no less an
object than his own epitaph, composed by himself.  It may be translated
thus:--

     Stop, Spectator!
     If thou has reverently cultivated the pleasures of the taste,
     pause amid these illustrious ruins of what was once
     a palace,
     and peruse with respect on this stone
     the epitaph of VETRANIO, a senator.
     He was the first man who invented a successful
     nightingale sauce;
     his bold and creative genius added much,
     and would have added more, to
     THE ART OF COOKERY;
     but, alas for the interests of science!
     he lived in the days when the Gothic barbarians besieged
     THE IMPERIAL CITY;
     famine left him no matter for gustatory experiment;
     and pestilence deprived him of cooks to enlighten!
     Opposed at all points by the force of adverse circumstances,
     finding his life of no further use to the culinary
     interests of Rome,
     he called his chosen friends together to assist him,
     conscientiously drank up every drop of wine remaining
     in his cellars,
     lit the funeral pile of himself and his guests,
     in the banqueting-hall of his own palace,
     and died, as he had lived,
     the patriotic CATO
     of his country's gastronomy!

'Behold!' cried Vetranio, pointing triumphantly to the epitaph--'behold
in every line of those eloquent letters at once the seal of my resolute
adherence to the engagement that unites us here, and the foundation of
my just claim to the reverence of posterity on the most useful of the
arts which I exercised for the benefit of my species!  Read, friends,
brethren, fellow-martyrs of glory, and, as you read, rejoice with me
over the hour of our departure from the desecrated arena, no longer
worthy the celebration of the Games of Life!  Yet, ere the feast
proceeds, hear me while I speak--I make my last oration as the arbiter
of our funeral sports, as the host of the Banquet of Famine!


'Who would sink ignobly beneath the slow superiority of starvation, or
perish under the quickly glancing steel of the barbarian conqueror's
sword, when such a death as ours is offered to the choice?--when wine
flows bright, to drown sensation in oblivion, and a palace and its
treasures furnish alike the scene of the revel and the radiant funeral
pile?  The mighty philosophers of India--the inspired
Gymnosophists--died as we shall die!  Calanus before Alexander, Zamarus
in the presence of Augustus, lit the fires that consumed them!  Let us
follow their glorious example!  No worms will prey upon our bodies, no
hired mourners will howl discordant at our funerals!  Purified in the
radiance of primeval fire, we shall vanish triumphant from enemies and
friends--a marvel to the earth, a vision of glory to the gods
themselves!

'Is it a day more or a day less of life that is now of importance to
us? No; it is only towards the easiest and the noblest death that our
aspirations can turn!  Among our number there is now not one whom the
care of existence can further occupy!

'Here, at my right hand, reclines my estimable comrade of a thousand
former feasts, Furius Balburius Placidus, who, when we sailed on the
Lucrine Lake, was wont to complain of intolerable hardship if a fly
settled on the gilded folds of his umbrella; who languished for a land
of Cimmerian darkness if a sunbeam penetrated the silken awnings of his
garden-terrace; and who now wrangles for a mouthful of horseflesh with
the meanest of his slaves, and would exchange the richest of his
country villas for a basket of dirty bread!  O Furius Balburius
Placidus, of what further use is life to thee?

'There, at my left, I discern the changed though still expressive
countenance of the resolute Thascius, he who chastised a slave with a
hundred lashes if his warm water was not brought immediately at his
command; he whose serene contempt for every member of the human species
by himself once ranked him among the greatest of human philosophers;
even he now wanders through his palace unserved, and fawns upon the
plebeian who will sell him a measure of wretched bran!  Oh, admired
friend, oh, rightly reasoning Thascius, say, is there anything in Rome
which should delay thee on thy journey to the Elysian Fields?

'Farther onward at the table, drinking largely while I speak, I behold,
O Marcus Moecius Moemmius, thy once plump and jovial form!--thou, in
former days accustomed to rejoice in the length of thy name, because it
enabled thy friends to drink the more in drinking a cup to each letter
of it, tell me what banqueting-hall is now open to thee but this?--and
thus desolate in the city of thy social triumphs, what should
disincline thee to make of our festal solemnity thy last revel on earth?

'Thou, too, facetious hunchback, prince of parasites, unscrupulous
Reburrus, where, but at this banquet of famine, will thy buffoonery now
procure for thee a draught of reviving wine?  Thy masters have
abandoned thee to thy native dunghill!  No more shalt thou wheedle for
them when they borrow, or bully for them when they pay!  No more
charges of poisoning or magic shalt thou forge to imprison their
troublesome creditors!  Oh, officious sycophant, thy occupations are no
more!  Drink while thou canst, and then resign thy carcass to congenial
mire!

'And you, my five remaining friends, whom--little desirous of further
delay--I will collectively address, think on the days when the
suspicion of an infectious malady in any one of your companions was
sufficient to separate you from the dearest of them; when the slaves
who came to you from their palaces underwent long ceremonies of
ablution before they approached your presence; and remembering this,
reflect that most, perhaps all of us, now meet here plague-tainted
already; and then say, of what advantage is it to languish for a life
which is yours no longer?

'No, my friends, my brethren of the banquet; feeling that when life is
worthless it is folly to live, you cannot shrink from the lofty
resolution by which we are bound, you cannot pause on our joyful
journey of departure from the scenes of earth--I wrong you even by a
doubt!  Let me now, rather, ask your attention for a worthier
subject--the enumeration of the festal ceremonies by which the progress
of the banquet will be marked.  That task concluded, that last ceremony
of my last welcome to you these halls duly performed, I join you once
more in your final homage to the deity of our social lives--the God of
Wine!


'It is not unknown to you--learned as you are in the jovial antiquities
of the table--that it was, among some of the ancients, a custom for a
master-spirit of philosophy to preside--the teacher as well as the
guest--at their feasts.  This usage it has been my care to revive, and,
as this four meeting is unparalleled in its heroic design, so it was my
ambition to bid to it one unparalleled, either as a teacher or a guest.
Fired by an original idea, unobserved of my slaves, aided only by my
singing-boy, the faithful Glyco, I have succeeded in placing behind
that black curtain such an associate of our revels as you have never
feasted with before, whose appearance at the fitting moment must strike
you irresistibly with astonishment, and whose discourse--not of human
wisdom only--will be inspired by the midnight secrets of the tomb.  By
my side, on this parchment, lies the formulary of questions to be
addressed by Reburrus, when the curtain is withdrawn, to the Oracle of
the Mysteries of other Spheres.

'Before you, behold in those vases all that remains of my once
well-stocked cellars, and all that is provided for the palates of my
guests! We sit at the Banquet of Famine, and no coarser sustenance than
inspiring wine finds admittance at the Bacchanalian board.  Yet, should
any among us, in his last moments, be feeble enough to pollute his lips
with nourishment alone worthy of the vermin of the earth, let him seek
the wretched and scanty table, type of the wretched and scanty food
that covers it, placed yonder in obscurity behind me.  There will he
find (in all barely sufficient for one man's poorest meal) the last
morsels of the vilest nourishment left in the palace.  For me, my
resolution is fixed--it is only the generous wine-cup that shall now
approach my lips!

'Above me are the ten lamps, answering to the number of my friends here
assembled.  One after another, as the wine overpowers us, those burning
images of life will be extinguished in succession by the guests who
remain proof against our draughts; and the last of these, lighting this
torch at the last lamp, will consummate the banquet, and celebrate its
glorious close, by firing the funeral pile of my treasures heaped
yonder against my palace walls!  If my powers fail me before yours,
swear to me that whoever among you is able to lift the cup to his lips
after it has dropped from the hands of the rest, will fire the pile!
Swear it by your lost mistresses, your lost friends, your lost
treasures!--by your own lives, devoted to the pleasures of wine and the
purification of fire!'

As, with flashing eyes and flushed countenance, Vetranio sank back on
his couch, his companions, inflamed with the wine they had already
drunk, arose cup in hand, and turned towards him.  Their voices,
discordantly mingled, pronounced the oath together; then, as they
resumed their former positions, their eyes all turned towards the black
curtain in ardent expectation.

They had observed the sinister and sarcastic expression of Vetranio's
eye as he spoke of his concealed guest; they knew that the hunchback
Reburrus possessed, among his other powers of buffoonery, the art of
ventriloquism; and they suspected the presence of some hideous or
grotesque image of a heathen god or demon in the hidden recess, which
the jugglery of the parasite was to gift with the capacity of speech.
Blasphemous comments upon life, death, and immortality were eagerly
awaited. The general impatience for the withdrawal of the curtain was
perceived by Vetranio, who, waving his hand for silence,
authoritatively exclaimed--

'The hour has not yet arrived.  More draughts must be drunk, more
libations poured out, ere the mystery of the curtain is revealed!  Ho,
Glyco!' he continued, turning towards the singing-boy, who had silently
entered the room, 'the moment is yours!  Tune your lyre, and recite my
last ode, which I have addressed to you!  Let the charms of Poetry
preside over the feast of Death!'

The boy advanced, trembling; his once ruddy face was colourless and
haggard; his eyes were fixed with a look of rigid terror on the black
curtain; his features palpably expressed the presence within him of
some secret and overwhelming recollection which had crushed all his
other faculties and perceptions.  Steadily, almost guiltily, averting
his face from his master's countenance, he stood by Vetranio's couch, a
frail and fallen being, a mournful spectacle of perverted docility and
degraded youth.

Still true, however, to the duties of his vocation, he ran his thin,
trembling fingers over the lyre, and mechanically preluded the
commencement of the ode.  But during the silence of attention which now
prevailed, the confused noises from the people in the street penetrated
more distinctly into the banqueting-room; and at this moment, high
above them all--hoarse, raving, terrible, rose the voice of one man.

'Tell me not,' it cried, 'of perfumes wafted from the palace!--foul
vapours flow from it!--see, they sink, suffocating over me!--they bathe
sky and earth, and men who move around us, in fierce, green light!'

Then other voices of men and women, shrill and savage, broke forth in
interruption together:--'Peace, Davus! you awake the dead about you!'
'Hide in the darkness; you are plague-struck; your skin is shrivelled;
your gums are toothless!'  'When the palace is fired you shall be flung
into the flames to purify your rotten carcass!'

'Sing!' cried Vetranio furiously, observing the shudders that ran over
the boy's frame and held him speechless.  'Strike the lyre, as
Timotheus struck it before Alexander!  Drown in melody the barking of
the curs who wait for our offal in the street!'

Feebly and interruptedly the terrified boy began; the wild continuous
noises of the moaning voices from without sounding their awful
accompaniment to the infidel philosophy of his song as he breathed it
forth in faint and faltering accents.  It ran thus:--

TO GLYCO

    Ah, Glyco! why in flow'rs array'd?
    Those festive wreaths less quickly fade
    Than briefly-blooming joy!
    Those high-prized friends who share your mirth
    Are counterfeits of brittle earth,
    False coin'd in Death's alloy!

    The bliss your notes could once inspire,
    When lightly o'er the god-like lyre
    Your nimble fingers pass'd,
    Shall spring the same from others' skill--
    When you're forgot, the music still
    The player shall outlast!

    The sun-touch'd cloud that mounts the sky,
    That brightly glows to warm the eye,
    Then fades we know not where,
    Is image of the little breath
    Of life--and then, the doom of Death
    That you and I must share!

    Helpless to make or mar our birth,
    We blindly grope the ways of earth,
    And live our paltry hour;
    Sure, that when life has ceased to please,
    To die at will, in Stoic ease,
    Is yielded to our pow'r!

    Who, timely wise, would meanly wait
    The dull delay of tardy Fate,
    When Life's delights are shorn?
    No!  When its outer gloss has flown,
    Let's fling the tarnish'd bauble down
    As lightly as 'twas worn.

'A health to Glyco!  A deep draught to a singer from heaven come down
upon earth!' cried the guests, seizing their wine-cups, as the ode was
concluded, and draining them to the last drop.  But their drunken
applause fell noiseless upon the ear to which it was addressed.  The
boy's voice, as he sang the final stanza of the ode, had suddenly
changed to a shrill, almost an unearthly tone, then suddenly sank again
as he breathed forth the last few notes; and now as his dissolute
audience turned towards him with approving glances, they saw him
standing before them cold, rigid, and voiceless.  The next instant his
fixed features were suddenly distorted, his whole frame collapsed as if
torn by an internal spasm--he fell back heavily to the floor.  Those
around approached him with unsteady feet, and raised him in their arms.
His soul had burst the bonds of vice in which others had entangled it;
the voice of Death had whispered to the slave of the great despot,
Crime--'Be free!'

'We have heard the note of the swan singing its own funeral hymn!' said
the patrician Placidus, looking in maudlin pity from the corpse of the
boy to the face of Vetranio, which presented for the moment an
involuntary expression of grief and remorse.


'Our miracle of beauty and boy-god of melody has departed before us to
the Elysian fields!' muttered the hunchback Reburrus, in harsh,
sarcastic accents.

Then, during the short silence that ensued, the voices from the street,
joined on this occasion to a noise of approaching footsteps on the
pavement, became again distinctly audible in the banqueting-hall.
'News! news!' cried these fresh auxiliaries of the horde already
assembled before the palace. 'Keep together, you who still care for
your lives!  Solitary citizens have been lured by strange men into
desolate streets, and never seen again!  Jars of newly salted flesh,
which there were no beasts left in the city to supply, have been found
in a butcher's shop!  Keep together!  Keep together!'

'No cannibals among the mob shall pollute the body of my poor boy!'
cried Vetranio, rousing himself from his short lethargy of grief.  'Ho!
Thascius! Marcus! you who can yet stand! let us bear him to the funeral
pile!  He has died first--his ashes shall be first consumed!'

The two patricians arose as the senator spoke, and aided him in
carrying the body to the lower end of the room, where it was laid
across the table, beneath the black curtain, and between the heaps of
drapery and furniture piled up against each of the walls.  Then, as his
guests reeled back to their places, Vetranio, remaining by the side of
the corpse, and seizing in his unsteady hands a small vase of wine,
exclaimed in tones of fierce exultation:  'The hour has come--the
Banquet of Famine has ended--the Banquet of Death has begun!  A health
to the guest behind the curtain!  Fill--drink--behold!'

He drank deeply from the vase as he ceased, and drew aside the black
drapery above him.  A cry of terror and astonishment burst from the
intoxicated guests as they beheld in the recess now disclosed to view
the corpse of an aged woman, clothed in white, and propped up on a
high, black throne, with the face turned towards them, and the arms
(artificially supported) stretched out as if in denunciation over the
banqueting-table.  The lamp of yellow glass, which burnt high above the
body, threw over it a lurid and flickering light; the eyes were open,
the jaw had fallen, the long grey tresses drooped heavily on either
side of the white hollow cheeks.

'Behold!' cried Vetranio, pointing to the corpse--'Behold my secret
guest!  Who so fit as the dead to preside at the Banquet of Death?
Compelling the aid of Glyco, shrouded by congenial night, seizing on
the first corpse exposed before me in the street, I have set up there,
unsuspected by all, the proper idol of our worship, and philosopher at
our feast!  Another health to the queen of the fatal revels--to the
teacher of the mysteries of worlds unseen--rescued from rotting
unburied, to perish in the consecrated flames with the senators of
Rome! A health!--a health to the mighty mother, ere she begin the
mystic revelations!  Fill--drink!'

Fired by their host's example, recovered from their momentary awe,
already inflamed by the mad recklessness of debauchery, the guests
started from their couches, and with Bacchanalian shouts answered
Vetranio's challenge.  The scene at this moment approached the
supernatural.  The wild disorder of the richly laden tables; the wine
flowing over the floor from overthrown vases; the great lamps burning
bright and steady over the confusion beneath; the fierce gestures, the
disordered countenances of the revellers, as they waved their jewelled
cups over their heads in frantic triumph; and then the gloomy and
terrific prospect at the lower end of the hall--the black curtain, the
light burning solitary on its high pole, the dead boy lying across the
festal table, the living master standing by his side, and, like an evil
spirit, pointing upward in mockery to the white-robed corpse of the
woman, as it towered above all in its unnatural position, with its
skinny arms stretched forth, with its ghastly features appearing to
move as the faint and flickering light played over them,--produced
together such a combination of scarce-earthly objects as might be
painted, but cannot be described. It was an embodiment of a sorcerer's
vision--an apocalypse of sin triumphing over the world's last relics of
mortality in the vaults of death.


'To your task, Reburrus!' cried Vetranio, when the tumult was lulled;
'to your questions without delay!  Behold the teacher with whom you are
to hold commune!  Peruse carefully the parchment in your hand;
question, and question loudly--you speak to the apathetic dead!'

For some time before the disclosure of the corpse, the hunchback had
been seated apart at the end of the banqueting-hall opposite the
black-curtained recess, conning over the manuscript containing the list
of questions and answers which formed the impious dialogue he was to
hold, by the aid of his powers of ventriloquism, with the violated
dead.  When the curtain was withdrawn he had looked up for a moment,
and had greeted the appearance of the sight behind it with a laugh of
brutal derision, returning immediately to the study of his blasphemous
formulary which had been confided to his care.  At the moment when
Vetranio's commands were addressed to him he arose, reeled down the
apartment towards the corpse, and, opening the dialogue as he
approached it, began in loud jeering tones:  'Speak, miserable relict
of decrepit mortality!'

He paused as he uttered the last word, and gaining a point of view from
which the light of the lamp fell full upon the solemn and stony
features of the corpse, looked up defiantly at it.  In an instant a
frightful change passed over him, the manuscript dropped from his hand,
his deformed frame shrank and tottered, a shrill cry of recognition
burst from his lips, more like the yell of a wild beast than the voice
of a man.

The next moment, when the guests started up to question or deride him,
he turned slowly and faced them.  Desperate and drunken as they were,
his look awed them into utter silence.  His face was deathlike in hue,
as the face of the corpse above him--thick drops of perspiration
trickled down it like rain--his dry glaring eyes wandered fiercely over
the startled countenances before him, and, as he extended towards them
his clenched hands, he muttered in a deep gasping whisper:  'Who has
done this?  MY MOTHER!  MY MOTHER!'

As these few words--of awful import though of simple form--fell upon
the ears of those whom he addressed, such of them as were not already
sunk in insensibility looked round on each other almost sobered for the
moment, and all speechless alike.  Not even the clash of the wine-cups
was now heard at the banqueting-table--nothing was audible but the
sound, still fitfully rising and falling, of the voices of terror,
ribaldry, and anguish from the street; and the hoarse convulsive
accents of the hunchback, still uttering at intervals his fearful
identification of the dead body above him:  'MY  MOTHER!  MY MOTHER!'

At length Vetranio, who was the first to recover himself, addressed the
terrified and degraded wretch before him, in tones which, in spite of
himself, betrayed, as he began, an unwonted tremulousness and
restraint. 'What, Reburrus!' he cried, 'are you already drunken to
insanity, that you call the first dead body which by chance I
encountered in the street, and by chance brought hither, your mother?
Was it to talk of your mother, whom dead or alive we neither know nor
care for, that you were admitted here? Son of obscurity and inheritor
of rags, what are your plebeian parents to us!' he continued, refilling
his cup, and lashing himself into assumed anger as he spoke. 'To your
dialogue without delay, or you shall be flung from the windows to
mingle with your rabble-equals in the street!'


Neither by word nor look did the hunchback answer the senator's
menaces. For him, the voice of the living was stifled in the presence
of the dead.  The retribution that had gone forth against him had
struck his moral, as a thunderbolt might have stricken his physical
being.  His soul strove in agony within him, as he thought on the awful
fatality which had set the dead mother in judgment on the degraded
son--which had directed the hand of the senator unwittingly to select
the corpse of the outraged parent as the object for the infidel
buffoonery of the reckless child, at the very close of his impious
career.  His past life rose before him, for the first time, like a foul
vision, like a nightmare of horror, impurity, and crime.  He staggered
up the room, groping his way along the wall, as if the darkness of
midnight had closed round his eyes, and crouched down by the open
window.  Beneath him rose the evil and ominous voices from the street;
around him spread the pitiless array of his masters; before him
appeared the denouncing vision of the corpse.

He would have remained but a short time unmolested in his place of
refuge, but for an event which now diverted from him the attention of
Vetranio and his guests.  Drinking furiously to drown all recollection
of the catastrophe they had just witnessed, three of the revellers had
already suffered the worst consequences of an excess, which their
weakened frames were ill-fitted to bear.  One after another, at short
intervals, they fell back senseless on their couches; and one after
another, as they succumbed, the three lamps burning nearest to them
were extinguished.  The same speedy termination to the debauch seemed
to be in reserve for the rest of their companions, with the exception
of Vetranio and the two patricians who reclined at his right hand and
his left.  These three still preserved the appearance of
self-possession, but an ominous change had already overspread their
countenances.  The expression of wild joviality, of fierce
recklessness, had departed from their wild features; they silently
watched each other with vigilant and suspicious eyes; each in turn, as
he filled his wine-cup, significantly handled the torch with which the
last drinker was to fire the funeral pile.  As the numbers of their
rivals decreased, and the flame of lamp after lamp was extinguished,
the fatal contest for a suicide supremacy assumed a present and
powerful interest, in which all other purposes and objects were
forgotten.  The corpse at the foot of the banqueting-table, and the
wretch cowering in his misery at the window, were now alike unheeded.
In the bewildered and brutalised minds of the guests, one sensation
alone remained--the intensity of expectation which precedes the result
of a deadly strife.

But ere long--awakening the attention which might otherwise never have
been aroused--the voice of the hunchback was heard, as the spirit of
repentance now moved within him, uttering, in wild, moaning tones, a
strange confession of degradation and sin--addressed to none;
proceeding, independent of consciousness or will, from the depths of
his stricken soul.  He half raised himself, and fixed his sunken eyes
upon the dead body, as these words dropped from his lips:  'It was the
last time that I beheld her alive, when she approached me--lonely, and
feeble, and poor--in the street, beseeching me to return to her in the
days of her old age and her solitude, and to remember how she had loved
me in my childhood for my very deformity, how she had watched me
throughout the highways of Rome, that none should oppress or deride me!
The tears ran down her cheeks, she knelt to me on the hard pavement,
and I, who had deserted her for her poverty, to make myself a slave in
palaces among the accursed rich, flung down money to her as to a beggar
who wearied me, and passed on!  She died desolate; her body lay
unburied, and I knew it not!  The son who had abandoned the mother
never saw her more, until she rose before him there--avenging,
horrible, lifeless--a sight of death never to leave him!  Woe, woe to
the accursed in his deformity, and the accursed of his mother's corpse!'

He paused, and fell back again to the ground, grovelling and
speechless. The tyrannic Thascius, regarding him with a scowl of
drunken wrath, seized an empty vase, and poising it in his unsteady
hand, prepared to hurl it at the hunchback's prostrate form, when again
a single cry--a woman's--rising above the increasing uproar in the
street, rang shrill and startling through the banqueting-hall. The
patrician suspended his purpose as he heard it, mechanically listening
with the half-stupid, half-cunning attention of intoxication.  'Help!
help!' shrieked the voice beneath the palace windows--'he follows me
still--he attacked my dead child in my arms!  As I flung myself down
upon it on the ground, I saw him watching his opportunity to drag it by
the limbs from under me--famine and madness were in his eyes--I drove
him back--I fled--he follows me still!--save us, save us!'


At this instant her voice was suddenly stifled in the sound of fierce
cries and rushing footsteps, followed by an appalling noise of heavy
blows, directed at several points, against the steel railings before
the palace doors.  Between the blows, which fell slowly and together at
regular intervals, the infuriated wretches, whose last exertions of
strength were strained to the utmost to deal them, could be heard
shouting breathlessly to each other:  'Strike harder, strike harder!
the back gates are guarded against us by our comrades admitted to the
pillage of the palace instead of us.  You who would share the booty,
strike firm! the stones are at your feet, the gates of entrance yield
before you.'

Meanwhile a confused sound of trampling footsteps and contending voices
became audible from the lower apartments of the palace.  Doors were
violently shut and opened--shouts and execrations echoed and re-echoed
along the lofty stone passages leading from the slaves' waiting-rooms
to the grand staircase; treachery betrayed itself as openly within the
building as violence still proclaimed itself in the assault on the
gates outside.  The chief slaves had not been suspected by their
fellows without a cause; the bands of pillage and murder had been
organised in the house of debauchery and death; the chosen adherents
from the street had been secretly admitted through the garden gates,
and had barred and guarded them against further intrusion--another doom
than the doom they had impiously prepared for themselves was
approaching the devoted senators, at the hands of the slaves whom they
had oppressed, and the plebeians whom they had despised.

At the first sound of the assault without and the first intimation of
the treachery within, Vetranio, Thascius, and Marcus started from their
couches; the remainder of the guests, incapable either of thought or
action, lay, in stupid insensibility, awaiting their fate.  These three
men alone comprehended the peril that threatened them, and, maddened
with drink, defied, in their ferocious desperation, the death that was
in store for them.  'Hark! they approach, the rabble revolted from our
rule,' cried Vetranio scornfully, 'to take the lives that we despise
and the treasures that we have resigned!  The hour has come; I go to
fire the pile that involves in one common destruction our assassins and
ourselves!'

'Hold!' exclaimed Thascius, snatching the torch from his hand; 'the
entrance must first be defended, or, ere the flames are kindled, the
slaves will be here!  Whatever is movable--couches, tables,
corpses--let us hurl them all against the door!'

As he spoke he rushed towards the black-curtained recess, to set the
example to his companions by seizing the corpse of the woman; but he
had not passed more than half the length of the apartment, when the
hunchback, who had followed him unheeded, sprang upon him from behind,
and, with a shrill cry, fastening his fingers on his throat, hurled him
torn and senseless to the floor.  'Who touches the body that is mine?'
shrieked the deformed wretch, rising from his victim, and threatening
with his blood-stained hands Vetranio and Marcus, as they stood
bewildered, and uncertain for the moment whether first to avenge their
comrade or to barricade the door--'The son shall rescue the mother!  I
go to bury her!  Atonement!  Atonement!'

He leaped upon the table as he spoke, tore asunder with resistless
strength the cords which fastened the corpse to the throne, seized it
in his arms, and the next instant gained the door.  Uttering fierce,
inarticulate cries, partly of anguish and partly of defiance, he threw
it open, and stepped forward to descend, when he was met at the head of
the stairs by the band of assassins hurrying up, with drawn swords and
blazing torches, to their work of pillage and death.  He stood before
them--his deformed limbs set as firmly on the ground as if he were
preparing to descend the stairs at one leap--with the corpse raised
high on his breast; its unearthly features were turned towards them,
its bare arms were still stretched forth as they had been extended over
the banqueting-table, its grey hair streamed back and mingled with his
own: under the fitful illumination of the torches, which played red and
wild over him and his fearful burden, the dead and the living looked
joined to each other in one monstrous form.


Huddled together, motionless, on the stairs, their shouts of vengeance
and fury frozen on their lips, the assassins stood for one moment,
staring mechanically, with fixed, spell-bound eyes, upon the hideous
bulwark opposing their advance on the victims whom they had expected so
easily to surprise.  The next instant a superstitious panic seized
them; as the hunchback suddenly moved towards them to descend, the
corpse seemed to their terror-stricken eyes to be on the eve of
bursting its way through their ranks.  Ignorant of its introduction
into the palace, imagining it, in the revival of their slavish fears,
to be the spectral offspring of the magic incantations of the senators
above, they turned with one accord and fled down the stairs.  The sound
of their cries of fear grew fainter and fainter in the direction of the
garden as they hurried through the secret gates at the back of the
building.  Then the heavy, regular tamp of the hunchback's footsteps,
as he paced the solitary corridors after them, bearing his burden of
death, became audible in awful distinctness; then that sound also died
away and was lost, and nothing more was heard in the banqueting-room
save the sharp clang of the blows still dealt against the steel
railings from the street.

But now these grew rare and more rare in their recurrence; the strong
metal resisted triumphantly the utmost efforts of the exhausted rabble
who assailed it.  As the minutes moved on, the blows grew rapidly
fainter and fewer; soon they diminished to three, struck at long
intervals; soon to one, followed by deep execrations of despair; and,
after that, a great silence sank down over the palace and the street,
where such strife and confusion had startled the night-echoes but a few
moments before.

In the banqueting-hall this rapid succession of events--the marvels of
a few minutes--passed before Vetranio and Marcus as visions beheld by
their eyes, but neither contained nor comprehended by their minds.
Stolid in their obstinate recklessness, stupefied by the spectacle of
the startling perils--menacing yet harmless, terrifying though
transitory--which surrounded them, neither of the senators moved a
muscle or uttered a word, from the period when Thascius had fallen
beneath the hunchback's attack, to the period when the last blow
against the palace railings, and the last sound of voices from the
street, had ceased in silence.  Then the wild current of drunken
exultation, suspended within them during this brief interval, flowed
once more, doubly fierce, in its old course. Insensible, the moment
after they had passed away, to the warning and terrific scenes they had
beheld, each now looked round on the other with a glance of triumphant
levity. 'Hark!' cried Vetranio, 'the mob without, feeble and cowardly
to the last, abandon their puny efforts to force my palace gates!
Behold our banqueting-tables still sacred from the intrusion of the
revolted menials, driven before my guest from the dead, like a flock of
sheep before a single dog!  Say, O Marcus! did I not well to set the
corpse at the foot of our banqueting-table?  What marvels has it not
effected, borne before us by the frantic Reburrus, as a banner of the
hosts of death, against the cowardly slaves whose fit inheritance is
oppression, and whose sole sensation is fear!  See, we are free to
continue and conclude the banquet as we had designed!  The gods
themselves have interfered to raise us in security above our
fellow-mortals, whom we despise!  Another health, in gratitude to our
departed guest, the instrument of our deliverance, under the auspices
of omnipotent Jove!'

As Vetranio spoke, Marcus alone, out of all the revellers, answered his
challenge.  These two--the last-remaining combatants of the
strife--having drained their cups to the health proposed, passed slowly
down each side of the room, looking contemptuously on their prostrate
companions, and extinguishing every lamp but the two which burnt over
their own couches.  Then returning to the upper end of the tables, they
resumed their places, not to leave them again until the fatal rivalry
was finally decided, and the moment of firing the pile had actually
arrived.

The torch lay between them; the last vases of wine stood at their
sides. Not a word escaped the lips of either, to break the deep
stillness prevailing over the palace.  Each fixed his eyes on the
other, in stern and searching scrutiny, and cup for cup, drank in slow
and regular alternation.  The debauch, which had hitherto presented a
spectacle of brutal degradation and violence, now that it was
restricted to two men only--each equally unimpressed by the scenes of
horror he had beheld, each vying with the other for the attainment of
the supreme of depravity--assumed an appearance of hardly human
iniquity; it became a contest for a satanic superiority of sin.

For some time little alteration appeared in the countenances of either
of the suicide-rivals; but they had now drunk to that final point of
excess at which wine either acts as its own antidote, or overwhelms in
fatal suffocation the pulses of life.  The crisis in the strife was
approaching for both, and the first to experience it was Marcus.
Vetranio, as he watched him, observed a dark purple flush overspreading
his face, hitherto pale, almost colourless.  His eyes suddenly dilated;
he panted for breath.  The vase of wine, when he strove with a last
effort to fill his cup from it, rolled from his hand to the floor.  The
stare of death was in his face as he half-raised himself and for one
instant looked steadily on his companion; the moment after, without
word or groan, he dropped backward over his couch.

The contest of the night was decided!  The host of the banquet and the
master of the palace had been reserved to end the one and to fire the
other!

A smile of malignant triumph parted Vetranio's lips as he now arose and
extinguished the last lamp burning besides his own.  That done, he
grasped the torch.  His eyes, as he raised it, wandered dreamily over
the array of his treasures, and the forms of his dead or insensible
fellow-patricians around him, to be consumed by his act in annihilating
fire.  The sensation of his solemn night-solitude in his fated palace
began to work in vivid and varying impressions on his mind, which was
partially recovering some portion of its wonted acuteness, under the
bodily reaction now produced in him by the very extravagance of the
night's excess.  His memory began to retrace confusedly the scenes with
which the dwelling that he was about to destroy had been connected at
distant or at recent periods.  At one moment the pomp of former
banquets, the jovial congregation of guests since departed or dead,
revived before him; at another, he seemed to be acting over again his
secret departure from his dwelling on the night before his last feast,
his stealthy return with the corpse that he had dragged from the
street, his toil in setting it up in mockery behind the black curtain,
and inventing the dialogue to be spoken before it by the hunchback.
Now his thoughts reverted to the minutest circumstances of the
confusion and dismay among the members of his household when the first
extremities of the famine began to be felt in the city; and now,
without visible connection or cause, they turned suddenly to the
morning when he had hurried through the most solitary paths in his
grounds to meet the betrayer Ulpius at Numerian's garden gate.  Once
more the image of Antonina--so often present to his imagination since
the original was lost to his eyes--grew palpable before him.  He
thought of her, as listening at his knees to the sound of his lute; as
awakening, bewildered and terrified, in his arms; as flying
distractedly before her father's wrath; as now too surely lying dead,
in her beauty and her innocence, amid the thousand victims of the
famine and the plague.

These and other reflections, while they crowded in whirlwind rapidity
on his mind, wrought no alteration in the deadly purpose which they
suspended.  His delay in lighting the torch was the unconscious delay
of the suicide, secure in his resolution ere he lifts the poison to his
lips--when life rises before him as a thing that is past, and he stands
for one tremendous moment in the dark gap between the present and the
future--no more the pilgrim of Time--not yet the inheritor of Eternity!

So, in the dimly lighted hall, surrounded by the victims whom he had
hurried before him to their doom, stood the lonely master of the great
palace; and so spoke within him the mysterious voices of his last
earthly thoughts.  Gradually they sank and ceased, and stillness and
vacancy closed like dark veils over his mind.  Starting like one
awakened from a trance he once more felt the torch in his hand, and
once more the expression of fierce desperation appeared in his eyes as
he lit it steadily at the lamp above him.

The dew was falling pure to the polluted earth; the light breezes sang
their low daybreak anthem among the leaves to the Power that bade them
forth; night had expired, and morning was already born of it, as
Vetranio, with the burning torch in his hand, advanced towards the
funeral pile.


He had already passed the greater part of the length of the room, when
a faint sound of footsteps ascending a private staircase which led to
the palace gardens, and communicated with the lower end of the
banqueting-hall by a small door of inlaid ivory, suddenly attracted his
attention. He hesitated in his deadly purpose, listening to the slow,
regular approaching sound, which, feeble though it was, struck
mysteriously impressive upon his ear in the dreary silence of all
things around him. Holding the torch high above his head, as the
footsteps came nearer, he fixed his eyes in intense expectation upon
the door.  It opened, and the figure of a young girl clothed in white
stood before him.  One moment he looked upon her with startled eyes;
the next the torch dropped from his hand, and smouldered unheeded on
the marble floor.  It was Antonina!

Her face was overspread with a strange transparent paleness; her once
soft, round cheeks had lost their girlish beauty of form; her
expression, ineffably mournful, hopeless, and subdued, threw a simple,
spiritual solemnity over her whole aspect.  She was changed, awfully
changed to the profligate senator from the being of his former
admiration; but still there remained in her despairing eyes enough of
the old look of gentleness and patience, surviving through all anguish
and dread, to connect her, even as she was now, with what she had been.
She stood in the chamber of debauchery and suicide between the funeral
pile and the desperate man who was vowed to fire it, a feeble, helpless
creature, yet powerful in the influence of her presence, at such a
moment and in such a form, as a saving and reproving spirit, armed with
the omnipotence of Heaven to mould the purposes of man.

Awed and astounded, as if he beheld an apparition from the tomb,
Vetranio looked upon this young girl--whom he had loved with the least
selfish passion that ever inspired him; whom he had lamented as long
since lost and dead with the sincerest grief he had ever felt; whom he
now saw standing before him at the very moment ere he doomed himself to
death, altered, desolate, supplicating--with emotions which held him
speechless in wonder, and even in dread.  While he still gazed upon her
in silence, he heard her speaking to him in low, melancholy, imploring
accents, which fell upon his ear, after the voices of terror and
desperation that had risen around him throughout the night, like tones
never addressed to it before.

'Numerian, my father, is sinking under the famine,' she began; 'if no
help is given to him, he may die even before sunrise!  You are rich and
powerful; I have come to you, having nothing now but his life to live
for, to beg sustenance for him!'  She paused, overpowered for the
moment, and bent her eyes wistfully on the senator's face.  Then seeing
that he vainly endeavoured to answer her, her head drooped upon her
breast, and her voice sank lower as she continued:--

'I have striven for patience under much sorrow and pain through the
long night that is past; my eyes were heavy and my spirit was faint; I
could have rendered up my soul willingly in my loneliness and
feebleness to God who gave it, but that it was my duty to struggle for
my life and my father's, now that I was restored to him after I had
lost all beside!  I could not think, or move, or weep, as, looking
forth upon your palace, I watched and waited through the hours of
darkness.  But, as morning dawned, the heaviness at my heart was
lightened; I remembered that the palace I saw before me was yours; and,
though the gates were closed, I knew that I could reach it through your
garden that joins to my father's land.  I had none in Rome to ask mercy
of but you; so I set forth hastily, ere my weakness should overpower
me, remembering that I had inherited much misery at your hands, but
hoping that you might pity me for what I had suffered when you saw me
again.  I came wearily through the garden; it was long before I found
my way hither; will you send me back as helpless as I came?  You first
taught me to disobey my father in giving me the lute; will you refuse
to aid me in succouring him now?  He is all that I have left in the
world!  Have mercy upon him!--have mercy upon me!'


Again she looked up in Vetranio's face.  His trembling lips moved, but
still no sound came from them.  The expression of confusion and awe yet
prevailed over his features as he pointed slowly towards the upper end
of the banqueting-table.  To her this simple action was eloquent beyond
all power of speech; she turned her feeble steps instantly in the
direction he had indicated.

He watched her, by the light of the single lamp that still burnt,
passing--strong in the shielding inspiration of her good purpose--amid
the bodies of his suicide companions without pausing on her way.
Having gained the upper end of the room, she took from the table a
flask of wine, and from the wooden stand behind it the bowl of offal
disdained by the guests at the fatal banquet, returning immediately to
the spot where Vetranio still stood.  Here she stopped for a moment, as
if about to speak once more; but her emotions overpowered her.  From
the sources which despair and suffering had dried up, the long-prisoned
tears once more flowed forth at the bidding of gratitude and hope. She
looked upon the senator, silent as himself, and her expression at that
instant was destined to remain on his memory while memory survived.
Then, with faltering and hasty steps, she departed by the way she had
come; and in the great palace, which his evil supremacy over the wills
of others had made a hideous charnel-house, he was once more left alone.

He made no effort to follow or detain her as she left him.  The torch
still smouldered beside him on the floor, but he never stooped to take
it up; he dropped down on a vacant couch, stupefied by what he had
beheld.  That which no entreaties, no threats, no fierce violence of
opposition could have effected in him, the appearance of Antonina had
produced--it had forced him to pause at the very moment of the
execution of his deadly design.

He remembered how, from the very first day when he had seen her, she
had mysteriously influenced the whole progress of his life; how his
ardour to possess her had altered his occupations, and even interrupted
his amusements; how all his energy and all his wealth had been baffled
in the attempt to discover her when she fled from her father's house;
how the first feeling of remorse that he had ever known had been
awakened within him by his knowledge of the share he had had in
producing her unhappy fate.  Recalling all this; reflecting that, had
she approached him at an earlier period, she would have been driven
back affrighted by the drunken clamour of his companions; and had she
arrived at a later, would have found his palace in flames; thinking at
the same time of her sudden presence in the banqueting-hall when he had
believed her to be dead, when her appearance at the moment before he
fired the pile was most irresistible in its supernatural influence over
his actions--that vague feeling of superstitious dread which exists
intuitively in all men's minds, which had never before been aroused in
his, thrilled through him.  His eyes were fixed on the door by which
she had departed, as if he expected her to return.  Her destiny seemed
to be portentously mingled with his own; his life seemed to move, his
death to wait at her bidding.  There was no repentance, no moral
purification in the emotions which now suspended his bodily faculties
in inaction; he was struck for the time with a mental paralysis.

The restless moments moved onward and onward, and still he delayed the
consummation of the ruin which the night's debauch had begun.  Slowly
the tender daylight grew and brightened in its beauty, warmed the cold
prostrate bodies in the silent hall, and dimmed the faint glow of the
wasting lamp; no black mist of smoke, no red glare of devouring fire
arose to quench its fair lustre; no roar of flames interrupted the
murmuring morning tranquillity of nature, or startled from their heavy
repose the exhausted outcasts stretched upon the pavement of the
street. Still the noble palace stood unshaken on its firm foundations;
still the adornments of its porticoes and its statues glittered as of
old in the rays of the rising sun; and still the hand of the master who
had sworn to destroy it, as he had sworn to destroy himself, hung idly
near the torch which lay already extinguished in harmless ashes at his
feet.



CHAPTER 23.

THE LAST EFFORTS OF THE BESIEGED.

We return to the street before the palace.  The calamities of the siege
had fallen fiercely on those who lay there during the night.  From the
turbulent and ferocious mob of a few hours since, not even the sound of
a voice was now heard.  Some, surprised in a paroxysm of hunger by
exhaustion and insensibility, lay with their hands half forced into
their mouths, as if in their ravenous madness they had endeavoured to
prey upon their own flesh.  Others now and then wearily opened their
languid eyes upon the street, no longer regardful, in the present
extremity of their sufferings, of the building whose destruction they
had assembled to behold, but watching for a fancied realisation of the
visions of richly spread tables and speedy relief called up before
them, as if in mockery, by the delirium of starvation and disease.

The sun had as yet but slightly risen above the horizon, when the
attention of the few among the populace who still preserved some
perception of outward events was suddenly attracted by the appearance
of an irregular procession--composed partly of citizens and partly of
officers of the Senate, and headed by two men--which slowly approached
from the end of the street leading into the interior of the city.  This
assembly of persons stopped opposite Vetranio's palace; and then such
members of the mob who watched them as were not yet entirely abandoned
by hope, heard the inspiring news that the procession they beheld was a
procession of peace, and that the two men who headed it were the
Spaniard, Basilius, a governor of a province, and Johannes, the chief
of the Imperial notaries--appointed ambassadors to conclude a treaty
with the Goths.

As this intelligence reached them, men who had before appeared
incapable of the slightest movement now rose painfully, yet resolutely,
to their feet, and crowded round the two ambassadors as round two
angels descended to deliver them from bondage and death.  Meanwhile,
some officers of the Senate, finding the front gates of the palace
closed against them, proceeded to the garden entrance at the back of
the building, to obtain admission to its owner.  The absence of
Vetranio and his friends from the deliberations of the government had
been attributed to their disgust at the obstinate and unavailing
resistance offered to the Goths.  Now, therefore, when submission had
been resolved upon, it had been thought both expedient and easy to
recall them peremptorily to their duties.  In addition to this motive
for seeking the interior of the palace, the servants of the Senate had
another errand to perform there.  The widely rumoured determination of
Vetranio and his associates to destroy themselves by fire, in the
frenzy of a last debauch--disbelieved or disregarded while the more
imminent perils of the city were under consideration--became a source
of some apprehension and anxiety to the acting members of the Roman
council, now that their minds were freed from part of the
responsibility which had weighed on them, by their resolution to treat
for peace.

Accordingly, the persons now sent into the palace were charged with the
duty of frustrating its destruction, if such an act had been really
contemplated, as well as the duty of recalling its inmates to their
appointed places in the Senate-house.  How far they were enabled, at
the time of their entrance into the banqueting-hall, to accomplish
their double mission, the reader is well able to calculate.  They found
Vetranio still in the place which he had occupied since Antonina had
quitted him.  Startled by their approach from the stupor which had
hitherto weighed on his faculties, the desperation of his purpose
returned; he made an effort to tear from its place the lamp which still
feebly burned, and to fire the pile in defiance of all opposition.  But
his strength, already taxed to the utmost, failed him.  Uttering
impotent threats of resistance and revenge, he fell, swooning and
helpless, into the arms of the officers of the Senate who held him
back. One of them was immediately dismissed, while his companions
remained in the palace, to communicate with the leaders of the assembly
outside. His report concluded, the two ambassadors moved slowly onward,
separating themselves from the procession which had accompanied them,
and followed only by a few chosen attendants--a mournful and a degraded
embassy, sent forth by the people who had once imposed their dominion,
their customs, and even their language, on the Eastern and Western
worlds, to bargain with the barbarians whom their fathers had enslaved
for the purchase of a disgraceful peace.


On the departure of the ambassadors, all the spectators still capable
of the effort repaired to the Forum to await their return, and were
joined there by members of the populace from other parts of the city.
It was known that the first intimation of the result of the embassy
would be given from this place; and in the eagerness of their anxiety
to hear it, in the painful intensity of their final hopes of
deliverance, even death itself seemed for a while to be arrested in its
fatal progress through the ranks of the besieged.

In silence and apprehension they counted the tardy moments of delay,
and watched with sickening gaze the shadows lessening and lessening, as
the sun gradually rose in the heavens to the meridian point.

At length, after an absence that appeared of endless duration, the two
ambassadors re-entered Rome. Neither of them spoke as they hurriedly
passed through the ranks of the people; but their looks of terror and
despair were all-eloquent to every beholder--their mission had failed.

For some time no member of the government appeared to have resolution
enough to come forward and harangue the people on the subject of the
unsuccessful embassy.  After a long interval, however, the Prefect
Pompeianus himself, urged partly by the selfish entreaties of his
friends, and partly by the childish love of display which still adhered
to him through all his present anxieties and apprehensions, stepped
into one of the lower balconies of the Senate-house to address the
citizens beneath him.

The chief magistrate of Rome was no longer the pompous and portly
personage whose intrusion on Vetranio's privacy during the commencement
of the siege has been described previously.  The little superfluous
flesh still remaining on his face hung about it like an ill-fitting
garment; his tones had become lachrymose; the oratorical gestures, with
which he was wont to embellish profusely his former speeches, were all
abandoned; nothing remained of the original man but the bombast of his
language and the impudent complacency of his self-applause, which now
appeared in contemptible contrast to his crestfallen demeanour and his
disheartening narrative of degradation and defeat.

'Men of Rome, let each of you exercise in his own person the heroic
virtues of a Regulus or a Cato!' the prefect began.  'A treaty with the
barbarians is out of our power.  It is the scourge of the empire,
Alaric himself, who commands the invading forces!  Vain were the
dignified remonstrances of the grave Basilius, futile was the
persuasive rhetoric of the astute Johannes, addressed to the
slaughtering and vainglorious Goth!  On their admission to his
presence, the ambassadors, anxious to awe him into a capitulation,
enlarged, with sagacious and commendable patriotism, on the expertness
of the Romans in the use of arms, their readiness for war, and their
vast numbers within the city walls.  I blush to repeat the barbarian's
reply.  Laughing immoderately, he answered, "The thicker the grass, the
easier it is to cut!"

'Still undismayed, the ambassadors, changing their tactics, talked
indulgently of their willingness to purchase a peace.  At this
proposal, his insolence burst beyond all bounds of barbarous arrogance.
"I will not relinquish the siege," he cried, "until I have delivered to
me all the gold and silver in the city, all the household goods in it,
and all the slaves from the northern countries."  "What then, O King,
will you leave us?" asked our amazed ambassadors.  "YOUR LIVES!"
answered the implacable Goth.  Hearing this, even the resolute Basilius
and the wise Johannes despaired.  They asked time to communicate with
the Senate, and left the camp of the enemy without further delay.  Such
was the end of the embassy; such the arrogant ferocity of the barbarian
foe!'

Here the Prefect paused, from sheer weakness and want of breath.  His
oration, however, was not concluded.  He had disheartened the people by
his narrative of what had occurred to the ambassadors; he now proceeded
to console them by his relation of what had occurred to himself, when,
after an interval, he thus resumed:--


'But even yet, O citizens of Rome, it is not time to despair!  There is
another chance of deliverance still left to us, and that chance has
been discovered by me.  It was my lot, during the absence of the
ambassadors, to meet with certain men of Tuscany, who had entered Rome
a few days before the beginning of the siege, and who spoke of a
project for relieving the city which they would communicate to the
Prefect alone. Ever anxious for the public welfare, daring all
treachery from strangers for advantage of my office, I accorded to
these men a secret interview. They told me of a startling and
miraculous event.  The town of Neveia, lying, as you well know, in the
direct road of the barbarians when they marched upon Rome, was
protected from their pillaging bands by a tempest of thunder and
lightning terrible to behold.  This tempest arose not, as you may
suppose, from an accidental convulsion of the elements, but was
launched over the heads of the invaders by the express interference of
the tutelary deities of the town, invocated by the inhabitants, who
returned in their danger to the practice of their ancient manner of
worship.  So said the men of Tuscany; and such pious resources as those
employed by the people of Neveia did they recommend to the people of
Rome!  For my part, I acknowledge to you that I have faith in their
project.  The antiquity of our former worship is still venerable in my
eyes.  The prayers of the priests of our new religion have wrought no
miraculous interference in our behalf:  let us therefore imitate the
example of the inhabitants of Neveia, and by the force of our
invocations hurl the thunders of Jupiter on the barbarian camp!  Let us
trust for deliverance to the potent interposition of the gods whom our
fathers worshipped--those gods who now, perhaps, avenge themselves for
our desertion of their temples by our present calamities.  I go without
delay to propose to the Bishop Innocentius and to the Senate, the
public performance of solemn ceremonies of sacrifice at the Capitol!  I
leave you in the joyful assurance that the gods, appeased by our
returning fidelity to our altars, will not refuse the supernatural
protection which they accorded to the people of a provincial town to
the citizens of Rome!'

No sounds either of applause or disapprobation followed the Prefect's
notable proposal for delivering the city from the besiegers by the
public apostasy of the besieged.  As he disappeared from their eyes,
the audience turned away speechless.  An universal despair now
overpowered in them even the last energies of discord and crime; they
resigned themselves to their doom with the gloomy indifference of
beings in whom all mortal sensations, all human passions, good or evil,
were extinguished.  The Prefect departed on his ill-omened expedition
to propose the practice of Paganism to the bishop of a Christian
church; but no profitable effort for relief was even suggested, either
by the government or the people.

And so this day drew in its turn towards a close--more mournful and
more disastrous, more fraught with peril, misery, and gloom, than the
days that had preceded it.

The next morning dawned, but no preparations for the ceremonies of the
ancient worship appeared at the Capitol.  The Senate and the bishop
hesitated to incur the responsibility of authorising a public
restoration of Paganism; the citizens, hopeless of succour, heavenly or
earthly, remained unheedful as the dead of all that passed around them.

There was one man in Rome who might have succeeded in rousing their
languid energies to apostasy; but where and how employed was he?

Now, when the opportunity for which he had laboured resolutely, though
in vain, through a long existence of suffering, degradation, and crime,
had gratuitously presented itself more tempting and more favourable
than even he in his wildest visions of success had ever dared to
hope--where was Ulpius?  Hidden from men's eyes, like a foul reptile,
in his lurking-place in the deserted temple--now raving round his idols
in the fury of madness, now prostrate before them in idiot
adoration--weaker for the interests of his worship, at the crisis of
its fate, than the weakest child crawling famished through the
streets--the victim of his own evil machinations at the very moment
when they might have led him to triumph--the object of that worst
earthly retribution, by which the wicked are at once thwarted, doomed,
and punished, here as hereafter, through the agency of their own sins.


Three more days passed.  The Senate, their numbers fast diminishing in
the pestilence, occupied the time in vain deliberations or in moody
silence.  Each morning the weary guards looked forth from the ramparts,
with the fruitless hope of discerning the long-promised legions from
Ravenna on their way to Rome; and each morning devastation and death
gained ground afresh among the hapless besieged.

At length, on the fourth day, the Senate abandoned all hope of further
resistance and determined on submission, whatever might be the result.
It was resolved that another embassy, composed of the whole acting
Senate, and followed by a considerable train, should proceed to Alaric;
that one more effort should be made to induce him to abate his ruinous
demands on the conquered; and that if this failed, the gates should be
thrown open, and the city and the people abandoned to his mercy in
despair.

As soon as the procession of this last Roman embassy was formed in the
Forum, its numbers were almost immediately swelled, in spite of
opposition, by those among the mass of the people who were still able
to move their languid and diseased bodies, and who, in the extremity of
their misery, had determined at all hazards to take advantage of the
opening of the gates, and fly from the city of pestilence in which they
were immured, careless whether they perished on the swords of the Goths
or languished unaided on the open plains.  All power of enforcing order
had long since been lost; the few soldiers gathered about the senators
made one abortive effort to drive the people back, and then resigned
any further resistance to their will.

Feebly and silently the spirit-broken assembly now moved along the
great highways, so often trodden, to the roar of martial music and the
shouts of applauding multitudes, by the triumphal processions of
victorious Rome; and from every street, as it passed on, the wasted
forms of the people stole out like spectres to join it.

Among these, as the embassy approached the Pincian Gate, were two,
hurrying forth to herd with their fellow-sufferers, on whose fortunes
in the fallen city our more particular attention has been fixed.  To
explain their presence on the scene (if such an explanation be
required) it is necessary to digress for a moment from the progress of
events during the last days of the siege to the morning when Antonina
departed from Vetranio's palace to return with her succour of food and
wine to her father's house.

The reader is already acquainted, from her own short and simple
narrative, with the history of the closing hours of her mournful night
vigil by the side of her sinking parent, and with the motives which
prompted her to seek the palace of the senator, and entreat assistance
in despair from one whom she only remembered as the profligate
destroyer of her tranquility under her father's roof. It is now,
therefore, most fitting to follow her on her way back through the
palace gardens.  No living creature but herself trod the grassy paths,
along which she hastened with faltering steps--those paths which she
dimly remembered to have first explored when in former days she
ventured forth to follow the distant sounds of Vetranio's lute.

In spite of her vague, heavy sensations of solitude and grief, this
recollection remained painfully present to her mind, unaccountably
mingled with the dark and dreary apprehension which filled her heart as
she hurried onward, until she once more entered her father's dwelling;
and then, as she again approached his couch, every other feeling became
absorbed in a faint, overpowering fear, lest, after all her
perseverance and success in her errand of filial devotion, she might
have returned too late.


The old man still lived--his weary eyes opened gladly on her, when she
aroused him to partake of the treasured gifts from the senator's
banqueting table.  The wretched food which the suicide-guests had
disdained, and the simple flask of wine which they would have
carelessly quaffed at one draught, were viewed both by parent and child
as the saving and invigorating sustenance of many days.  After having
consumed as much as they dared of their precarious supply, the
remainder was carefully husbanded.  It was the last sign and promise of
life to which they looked--the humble yet precious store in which alone
they beheld the earnest of their security, for a few days longer, from
the pangs of famine and the separation of death.

And now, with their small provision of food and wine set like a beacon
of safety before their sight, a deep, dream-like serenity--the sleep of
the oppressed and wearied faculties--arose over their minds. Under its
mysterious and tranquilising influence, all impressions of the gloom
and misery in the city, of the fatal evidences around them of the
duration of the siege, faded away before their perceptions as dim
retiring objects, which the eye loses in vacancy.

Gradually, as the day of the first unsuccessful embassy declined, their
thoughts began to flow back gently to the world of bygone events which
had crumbled into oblivion beneath the march of time. Her first
recollections of her earliest childhood revived in Antonina's memory,
and then mingled strangely with tearful remembrances of the last words
and looks of the young warrior who had expired by her side, and with
calm, solemn thoughts that the beloved spirit, emancipated from the
sphere of shadows, might now be hovering near the quiet garden-grave
where her bitterest tears of loneliness and affliction had been shed,
or moving around her--an invisible and blessed presence--as she sat at
her father's feet and mourned their earthly separation!

In the emotions thus awakened, there was nothing of bitterness or
agony--they calmed and purified the heart through which they moved.
She could now speak to the old man, for the first time, of her days of
absence from him, of the brief joys and long sorrows of her hours of
exile, without failing in her melancholy tale.  Sometimes her father
listened to her in sorrowful and speechless attention; or spoke, when
she paused, of consolation and hope, as she had heard him speak among
his congregation while he was yet strong in his resolution to sacrifice
all things for the reformation of the Church.  Sometimes resigning
himself to the influence of his thoughts, as they glided back to the
times that were gone, he again revealed to her the changing events of
his past life--not as before, with unsteady accents and wandering eyes;
but now with a calmness of voice and a coherence of language which
forbade her to doubt the strange and startling narrative that she heard.

Once more he spoke of the image of his lost brother (as he had parted
from him in his boyhood) still present to his mind; of the country that
he had quitted in after years; of the name that he had changed--from
Cleander to Numerian--to foil his former associates, if they still
pursued him; and of the ardent desire to behold again the companion of
his first home, which now, when his daughter was restored to him, when
no other earthly aspiration but this was unsatisfied, remained at the
close of his life, the last longing wish of his heart.

Such was the communion in which father and daughter passed the hours of
their short reprieve from the judgment of famine pronounced against the
city of their sojourn; so did they live, as it were, in a quiet
interval of existence, in a tranquil pause between the toil that is
over and the toil that is to come in the hard labour of life.

But the term to these short days of repose after long suffering and
grief was fast approaching.  The little hoard of provision diminished
as rapidly as the stores that had been anxiously collected before it;
and, on the morning of the second embassy to Alaric, the flask of wine
and the bowl of food were both emptied.  The brief dream of security
was over and gone; the terrible realities of the struggle for life had
begun again!

Where or to whom could they now turn for help?  The siege still
continued; the food just exhausted was the last food that had been left
on the senator's table; to seek the palace again would be to risk
refusal, perhaps insult, as the result of a second entreaty for aid,
where all power of conferring it might now but too surely be lost.
Such were the thoughts of Antonina as she returned the empty bowl to
its former place; but she gave them no expression in words.


She saw, with horror, that the same expression of despair, almost of
frenzy, which had distorted her father's features on the day of her
restoration to him, now marked them again.  Once more he tottered
towards the window, murmuring in his bitter despondency against the
delusive security and hope which had held him idle for the interests of
his child during the few days that were past.  But, as he now looked
out on the beleaguered city, he saw the populace hastening along the
gloomy street beneath, as rapidly as their wearied limbs would carry
them, to join the embassy.  He heard them encouraging each other to
proceed, to seize the last chance of escaping through the open gates
from the horrors of famine and plague; and caught the infection of the
recklessness and despair which had seized his fellow-sufferers from one
end of Rome to the other.

Turning instantly, he grasped his daughter's hand and drew her from the
room, commanding her to come forth with him and join the citizens in
their flight, ere it was too late.  Startled by his words and actions,
she vainly endeavoured, as she obeyed, to impress her father with the
dread of the Goths which her own bitter experience taught her to feel,
now that her only protector among them lay cold in the grave.  With
Numerian, as with the rest of the people, all apprehension, all doubt,
all exercise of reason, was overpowered by the one eager idea of
escaping from the fatal precincts of Rome.

So they mingled with the throng, herding affrightedly together in the
rear of the embassy, and followed in their ranks as best they might.

The sun shone down brightly from the pure blue sky; the wind bore into
the city the sharp threatening notes of the trumpets from the Gothic
camp, as the Pincian Gate was opened to the ambassadors and their
train. With one accord the crowd instantly endeavoured to force their
way out after them in a mass; but they now moved in a narrow space, and
were opposed by a large reinforcement of the city guard.  After a short
struggle they were overpowered, and the gates were closed.  Some few of
the strongest and the foremost of their numbers succeeded in following
the ambassadors; the greater part, however, remained on the inner side
of the gate, pressing closely up to it in their impatience and despair,
like prisoners awaiting their deliverance, or preparing to force their
escape.

Among these, feeblest amid the most feeble, were Numerian and Antonina,
hemmed in by the surrounding crowd, and shut out either from flight
from the city or a return to home.



CHAPTER 24.

THE GRAVE AND THE CAMP.

While the second and last embassy from the Senate proceeds towards the
tent of the Gothic king, while the streets of Rome are deserted by all
but the dead, and the living populace crowd together in speechless
expectation behind the barrier of the Pincian Gate, an opportunity is
at length afforded of turning our attention towards a scene from which
it has been long removed.  Let us now revisit the farm-house in the
suburbs, and look once more on the quiet garden and on Hermanric's
grave.

The tranquility of the bright warm day is purest around the retired
path leading to the little dwelling. Here the fragrance of wild flowers
rises pleasantly from the waving grass; the lulling, monotonous hum of
insect life pervades the light, steady air; the sunbeams, intercepted
here and there by the clustering trees, fall in irregular patches of
brightness on the shady ground; and, saving the birds which
occasionally pass overhead, singing in their flight, no living creature
appears on the quiet scene, until, gaining the wicket-gate which leads
into the farm-house garden, we look forth upon the prospect within.

There, following the small circular footpath which her own persevering
steps have day by day already traced, appears the form of a solitary
woman, pacing slowly about the mound of grassy earth which marks the
grave of the young Goth.


For some time she proceeds on her circumscribed round with as much
undeviating, mechanical regularity, as if beyond that narrow space rose
a barrier which caged her from ever setting foot on the earth beyond.
At length she pauses in her course when it brings her nearest to the
wicket, advances a few steps towards it, then recedes, and recommences
her monotonous progress, and then again breaking off on her round,
finally succeeds in withdrawing herself from the confines of the grave,
passes through the gate, and following the path to the high-road,
slowly proceeds towards the eastern limits of the Gothic camp.  The
fixed, ghastly, unfeminine expression on her features marks her as the
same woman whom we last beheld as the assassin at the farm-house, but
beyond this she is hardly recognisable again.  Her formerly powerful
and upright frame is bent and lean; her hair waves in wild, white locks
about her shrivelled face; all the rude majesty of her form has
departed; there is nothing to show that it is still Goisvintha haunting
the scene of her crime but the savage expression debasing her
countenance and betraying the evil heart within, unsubdued as ever in
its yearning for destruction and revenge.

Since the period when we last beheld her, removed in the custody of the
Huns from the dead body of her kinsman, the farm-house had been the
constant scene of her pilgrimage from the camp, the chosen refuge where
she brooded in solitude over her fierce desires.  Scorning to punish a
woman whom he regarded as insane for an absence from the tents of the
Goths which was of no moment wither to the army or to himself, Alaric
had impatiently dismissed her from his presence when she was brought
before him.  The soldiers who had returned to bury the body of their
chieftain in the garden of the farm-house, found means to inform her
secretly of the charitable act which they had performed at their own
peril, but beyond this no further intercourse was held with her by any
of her former associates.

All her actions favoured their hasty belief that her faculties were
disordered, and others shunned her as she shunned them.  Her daily
allowance of food was left for her to seek at a certain place in the
camp, as it might have been left for an animal too savage to be
cherished by the hand of man.  At certain periods she returned secretly
from her wanderings to take it.  Her shelter for the night was not the
shelter of her people before the walls of Rome; her thoughts were not
their thoughts.  Widowed, childless, friendless, the assassin of her
last kinsman, she moved apart in her own secret world of bereavement,
desolation, and crime.

Yet there was no madness, no remorse for her share in accomplishing the
fate of Hermanric, in the dark and solitary existence which she now
led. From the moment when the young warrior had expiated with his death
his disregard of the enmities of his nation and the wrongs of his
kindred, she thought of him only as of one more victim whose dishonour
and ruin she must live to requite on the Romans with Roman blood, and
matured her schemes of revenge with a stern resolution which time, and
solitude, and bodily infirmity were all powerless to disturb.


She would pace for hours and hours together, in the still night and in
the broad noonday, round and round the warrior's grave, nursing her
vengeful thoughts within her, until a ferocious anticipation of triumph
quickened her steps and brightened her watchful eyes.  Then she would
enter the farm-house, and, drawing the knife from its place of
concealment in her garments, would pass its point slowly backwards and
forwards over the hearth on which she had mutilated Hermanric with her
own hand, and from which he had advanced, without a tremor, to meet the
sword-points of the Huns. Sometimes, when darkness had gathered over
the earth, she would stand--a boding and menacing apparition--upon the
grave itself, and chaunt, moaning to the moaning wind, fragments of
obscure Northern legends, whose hideous burden was ever of anguish and
crime, of torture in prison vaults, and death by the annihilating
sword--mingling with them the gloomy story of the massacre at Aquileia,
and her fierce vows of vengeance against the households of Rome.  The
forager, on his late return past the farm-house to the camp, heard the
harsh, droning accents of her voice, and quickened his onward step.
The venturesome peasant from the country beyond, approaching under
cover of the night to look from afar on the Gothic camp, beheld her
form, shadowy and threatening, as he neared the garden, and fled
affrighted from the place.  Neither stranger nor friend intruded on her
dread solitude.  The foul presence of cruelty and crime violated
undisturbed the scenes once sacred to the interests of tenderness and
love, once hallowed by the sojourn of youth and beauty!

But now the farm-house garden is left solitary, the haunting spirit of
evil has departed from the grave, the footsteps of Goisvintha have
traced to their close the same paths from the suburbs over which the
young Goth once eagerly hastened on his night journey of love; and
already the walls of Rome rise--dark, near, and hateful--before her
eyes.  Along these now useless bulwarks of the fallen city she wanders,
as she has often wandered before, watching anxiously for the first
opening of the long-closed gates.  Let us follow her on her way.

Her attention was now fixed only on the broad ramparts, while she
passed slowly along the Gothic tents towards the encampment at the
Pincian Gate.  Arrived there, she was aroused for the first time from
her apathy by an unwonted stir and confusion prevailing around her.
She looked towards the tent of Alaric, and beheld before it the wasted
and crouching forms of the followers of the embassy awaiting their
sentence from the captain of the Northern hosts.  In a few moments she
gathered enough from the words of the Goths congregated about this part
of the camp to assure her that it was the Pincian Gate which had given
egress to the Roman suppliants, and which would therefore, in all
probability, be the entrance again thrown open to admit their return to
the city. Remembering this, she began to calculate the numbers of the
conquered enemy grouped together before the king's tent, and then
mentally added to them those who might be present at the interview
proceeding within--mechanically withdrawing herself, while thus
occupied, nearer and nearer to the waste ground before the city walls.

Gradually she turned her face towards Rome:  she was realising a daring
purpose, a fatal resolution, long cherished during the days and nights
of her solitary wanderings.  'The ranks of the embassy,' she muttered,
in a deep, thoughtful tone, 'are thickly filled.  Where there are many
there must be confusion and haste; they march together, and know not
their own numbers; they mark not one more or one less among them.'

She stopped.  Strange and dark changes of colour and expression passed
over her ghastly features. She drew from her bosom the bloody
helmet-crest of her husband, which had never quitted her since the day
of his death; her face grew livid under an awful expression of rage,
ferocity, and despair, as she gazed on it.  Suddenly she looked up at
the city--fierce and defiant, as if the great walls before her were
mortal enemies against whom she stood at bay in the death-struggle.

'The widowed and the childless shall drink of thy blood!' she cried,
stretching out her skinny hand towards Rome, 'though the armies of her
nation barter their wrongs with thy people for bags of silver and gold!
I have pondered on it in my solitude, and dreamed of it in my dreams!
I have sworn that I would enter Rome, and avenge my slaughtered
kindred, alone among thousands!  Now, now, I will hold to my oath!
Thou blood-stained city of the coward and the traitor, the enemy of the
defenceless, and the murderer of the weak! thou who didst send forth to
Aquileia the slayers of my husband and the assassins of my children, I
wait no longer before thy walls!  This day will I mingle, daring all
things, with thy returning citizens and penetrate, amid Romans, the
gates of Rome!  Through the day will I lurk, cunning and watchful, in
thy solitary haunts, to steal forth on thee at nights, a secret
minister of death!  I will watch for thy young and thy weak once in
unguarded places; I will prey, alone in the thick darkness, upon thy
unprotected lives; I will destroy thy children, as their fathers
destroyed at Aquileia the children of the Goths!  Thy rabble will
discover me and arise against me; they will tear me in pieces and
trample my mangled body on the pavement of the streets; but it will be
after I have seen the blood that I have sworn to shed flowing under my
knife!  My vengeance will be complete, and torments and death will be
to me as guests that I welcome, and as deliverers whom I await!'

Again she paused--the wild triumph of the fanatic on the burning pile
was flashing in her face--suddenly her eyes fell once more upon the
stained helmet-crest; then her expression changed again to despair, and
her voice grew low and moaning, when she thus resumed:--


'I am weary of my life; when the vengeance is done I shall be delivered
from this prison of the earth--in the world of shadows I shall see my
husband, and my little ones will gather round my knees again. The
living have no part in me; I yearn towards the spirits who wander in
the halls of the dead.'

For a few minutes more she continued to fix her tearless eyes on the
helmet-crest.  But soon the influence of the evil spirit revived in all
its strength; she raised her head suddenly, remained for an instant
absorbed in deep thought, then began to retrace her steps rapidly in
the direction by which she had come.

Sometimes she whispered softly, 'I must be doing ere the time fail me:
my face must be hidden and my garments changed.  Yonder, among the
houses, I must search, and search quickly!'  Sometimes she reiterated
her denunciations of vengeance, her ejaculations of triumph in her
frantic project.  At the recapitulation of these the remembrance of
Antonina was aroused; and then a bloodthirsty superstition darkened her
thoughts, and threw a vague and dreamy character over her speech.

When she spoke now, it was to murmur to herself that the victim who had
twice escaped her might yet be alive; that the supernatural influences
which had often guided the old Goths, on the day of retribution, might
still guide her; might still direct the stroke of her destroying
weapon--the last stroke ere she was discovered and slain--straight to
the girl's heart.

Thoughts such as these--wandering and obscure--arose in close, quick
succession within her; but whether she gave them expression in word and
action, or whether she suppressed them in silence, she never wavered or
halted in her rapid progress.  Her energies were braced to all
emergencies, and her strong will suffered them not for an instant to
relax.

She gained a retired street in the deserted suburbs, and looking round
to see that she was unobserved, entered on of the houses abandoned by
its inhabitants on the approach of the besiegers.  Passing quickly
through the outer halls, she stopped at length in one of the sleeping
apartments; and here she found, among other possessions left behind in
the flight, the store of wearing apparel belonging to the owner of the
room.

From this she selected a Roman robe, upper mantle, and sandals--the
most common in colour and texture that she could find--and folding them
up into the smallest compass, hid them under her own garments.  Then,
avoiding all those whom she met on her way, she returned in the
direction of the king's tent; but when she approached it, branched off
stealthily towards Rome, until she reached a ruined building half-way
between the city and the camp.  In this concealment she clothed herself
in her disguise, drawing the mantle closely round her head and face;
and from this point--calm, vigilant, determined, her hand on the knife
beneath her robe, her lips muttering the names of her murdered husband
and children--she watched the high-road to the Pincian Gate.

There for a short time let us leave her, and enter the tent of Alaric,
while the Senate yet plead before the Arbiter of the Empire for mercy
and peace.

At the moment of which we write, the embassy had already exhausted its
powers of intercession, apparently without moving the leader of the
Goths from his first pitiless resolution of fixing the ransom of Rome
at the price of every possession of value which the city contained.
There was a momentary silence now in the great tent.  At one extremity
of it, congregated in a close and irregular group, stood the wearied
and broken-spirited members of the Senate, supported by such of their
attendants as had been permitted to follow them; at the other appeared
the stately forms of Alaric and the warriors who surrounded him as his
council of war.  The vacant space in the middle of the tent was strewn
with martial weapons, separating the representatives of the two nations
one from the other; and thus accidentally, yet palpably, typifying the
fierce hostility which had sundered in years past, and was still to
sunder for years to come, the people of the North and the people of the
South.

The Gothic king stood a little in advance of his warriors, leaning on
his huge, heavy sword.  His steady eye wandered from man to man among
the broken-spirited senators, contemplating, with cold and cruel
penetration, all that suffering and despair had altered for the worse
in their outward appearance.  Their soiled robes, their wan cheeks,
their trembling limbs were each marked in turn by the cool, sarcastic
examination of the conqueror's gaze.  Debased and humiliated as they
were, there were some among the ambassadors who felt the insult thus
silently and deliberately inflicted on them the more keenly for their
very helplessness.  They moved uneasily in their places, and whispered
among each other in low and bitter accents.

At length one of their number raised his downcast eyes and broke the
silence.  The old Roman spirit, which long years of voluntary frivolity
and degradation had not yet entirely depraved, flushed his pale, wasted
face as he spoke thus:--

'We have entreated, we have offered, we have promised--men can do no
more!  Deserted by our Emperor and crushed by pestilence and famine,
nothing is now left to us but to perish in unavailing resistance
beneath the walls of Rome!  It was in the power of Alaric to win
everlasting renown by moderation to the unfortunate of an illustrious
nation; but he has preferred to attempt the spoiling of a glorious city
and the subjugation of a suffering people!  Yet let him remember,
though destruction may sate his vengeance, and pillage enrich his
hoards, the day of retribution will yet come.  There are still soldiers
in the empire, and heroes who will lead them confidently to battle,
though the bodies of their countrymen lie slaughtered around them in
the streets of pillaged Rome!'

A momentary expression of wrath and indignation appeared on Alaric's
features as he listened to this bold speech; but it was almost
immediately replaced by a scornful smile of derision.

'What! ye have still soldiers before whom the barbarian must tremble
for his conquests!' he cried. 'Where are they?  Are they on their
march, or in ambush, or hiding behind strong walls, or have they lost
their way on the road to the Gothic camp?  Ha! here is one of them!' he
exclaimed, advancing towards an enfeebled and disarmed guard of the
Senate, who quailed beneath his fierce glance. 'Fight, man!' he loudly
continued; 'fight while there is yet time, for imperial Rome!  Thy
sword is gone--take mine, and be a hero again!'

With a rough laugh, echoed by the warriors behind him, he flung his
ponderous weapon as he spoke towards the wretched object of his
sarcasm. The hilt struck heavily against the man's breast; he staggered
and fell helpless to the ground.  The laugh was redoubled among the
Goths; but now their leader did not join in it.  His eye glowed in
triumphant scorn as he pointed to the prostrate Roman, exclaiming--

'So does the South fall beneath the sword of the North!  So shall the
empire bow before the rule of the Goth!  Say, as ye look on these
Romans before us, are we not avenged of our wrongs?  They die not
fighting on our swords; they live to entreat our pity, as children that
are in terror of the whip!'


He paused.  His massive and noble countenance gradually assumed a
thoughtful expression.  The ambassadors moved forward a few
steps--perhaps to make a final entreaty, perhaps to depart in despair;
but he signed with his hand in command to them to be silent and remain
where they stood. The marauder's thirst for present plunder, and the
conqueror's lofty ambition of future glory, now stirred in strong
conflict within him.  He walked to the opening of the tent, and
thrusting aside its curtain of skins, looked out upon Rome in silence.
The dazzling majesty of the temples and palaces of the mighty city, as
they towered before him, gleaming in the rays of the unclouded
sunlight, fixed him long in contemplation.  Gradually, dreams of a
future dominion amid those unrivalled structures, which now waited but
his word to be pillaged and destroyed, filled his aspiring soul, and
saved the city from his wrath.  He turned again toward the shrinking
ambassadors--in a voice and look superior to them as a being of a
higher sphere--and spoke thus:--

'When the Gothic conqueror reigns in Italy, the palaces of her rulers
shall be found standing for the places of his sojourn.  I will ordain a
lower ransom; I will spare Rome.'

A murmur arose among the warriors behind him.  The rapine and
destruction which they had eagerly anticipated was denied them for the
first time by their chief.  As their muttered remonstrances caught his
ear, Alaric instantly and sternly fixed his eyes upon them; and,
repeating in accents of deliberate command, 'I will ordain a lower
ransom; I will spare Rome,' steadily scanned the countenances of his
ferocious followers.

Not a word of dissent fell from their lips; not a gesture of impatience
appeared in their ranks; they preserved perfect silence as the king
again advanced towards the ambassadors and continued--

'I fix the ransom of the city at five thousand pounds of gold; at
thirty thousand pounds of silver.'

Here he suddenly ceased, as if pondering further on the terms he should
exact.  The hearts of the Senate, lightened for a moment by Alaric's
unexpected announcement that he would moderate his demands, sank within
them again as they thought on the tribute required of them, and
remembered their exhausted treasury.  But it was no time now to
remonstrate or to delay; and they answered with one accord, ignorant
though they were of the means of performing their promise, 'The ransom
shall be paid.'

The king looked at them when they spoke, as if in astonishment that men
whom he had deprived of all freedom of choice ventured still to assert
it by intimating their acceptance of terms which they dared not
decline. The mocking spirit revived within him while he thus gazed on
the helpless and humiliated embassy; and he laughed once more as he
resumed, partly addressing himself to the silent array of the warriors
behind him--

'The gold and silver are but the first dues of the tribute; my army
shall be rewarded with more than the wealth of the enemy.  You men of
Rome have laughed at our rough bearskins and our heavy armour, you
shall clothe us with your robes of festivity!  I will add to the gold
and silver of your ransom, four thousand garments of silk, and three
thousand pieces of scarlet cloth.  My barbarians shall be barbarians no
longer!  I will make patricians, epicures, Romans of them!'

The members of the ill-fated embassy looked up as he paused, in mute
appeal to the mercy of the triumphant conqueror; but they were not yet
to be released from the crushing infliction of his rapacity and scorn.

'Hold!' he cried, 'I will have more--more still!  You are a nation of
feasters;--we will rival you in your banquets when we have stripped you
of your banqueting robes!  To the gold, the silver, the silk, and the
cloth, I will add yet more--three thousand pounds weight of pepper,
your precious merchandise, bought from far countries with your lavish
wealth!--see that you bring it hither, with the rest of the ransom, to
the last grain!  The flesh of our beasts shall be seasoned for us like
the flesh of yours!'

He turned abruptly from the senators as he pronounced the last words,
and began to speak in jesting tones and in the Gothic language to the
council of warriors around him.  Some of the ambassadors bowed their
heads in silent resignation; others, with the utter thoughtlessness of
men bewildered by all that they had seen and heard during the interview
that was now close, unhappily revived the recollection of the broken
treaties of former days, by mechanically inquiring, in the terms of
past formularies, what security the besiegers would require for the
payment of their demands.


'Security!' cried Alaric fiercely, instantly relapsing as they spoke
into his sterner mood.  'Behold yonder the future security of the Goths
for the faith of Rome!' and flinging aside the curtain of the tent, he
pointed proudly to the long lines of his camp, stretching round all
that was visible of the walls of the fallen city.

The ambassadors remembered the massacre of the hostages of Aquileia,
and the evasion of the payment of tribute-money promised in former
days, and were silent as they looked through the opening of the tent.

'Remember the conditions of the ransom,' pursued Alaric in warning
tones, 'remember my security that the ransom shall be quickly paid!  So
shall you live for a brief space in security, and feast and be merry
again while your territories yet remain to you.  Go!  I have spoken--it
is enough!'

He withdrew abruptly from the senators, and the curtain of the tent
fell behind them as they passed out.  The ordeal of the judgment was
over; the final sentence had been pronounced; the time had already
arrived to go forth and obey it.

The news that terms of peace had been at last settled filled the Romans
who were waiting before the tent with emotions of delight, equally
unalloyed by reflections on the past or forebodings for the future.
Barred from their reckless project of flying to the open country by the
Goths surrounding them in the camp, shut out from retreating to Rome by
the gates through which they had rashly forced their way, exposed in
their helplessness to the brutal jeers of the enemy while they waited
in a long agony of suspense for the close of the perilous interview
between Alaric and the Senate, they had undergone every extremity of
suffering, and had yielded unanimously to despair when the intelligence
of the concluded treaty sounded like a promise of salvation in their
ears.

None of the apprehensions aroused in the minds of their superiors by
the vastness of the exacted tribute now mingled with the unreflecting
ecstasy of their joy at the prospect of the removal of the blockade.
They arose to return to the city from which they had fled in dismay,
with cries of impatience and delight.  They fawned like dogs upon the
ambassadors, and even upon the ferocious Goths.  On their departure
from Rome they had mechanically preserved some regularity in their
progress, but now they hurried onward without distinction of place or
discipline of march--senators, guards, plebeians, all were huddled
together in the disorderly equality of a mob.

Not one of them, in their new-born security, marked the ruined building
on the high-road; not one of them observed the closely-robed figure
that stole out from it to join them in their rear; and then, with
stealthy footstep and shrouded face, soon mingled in the thickest of
their ranks. The attention of the ambassadors was still engrossed by
their forebodings of failure in collecting the ransom; the eyes of the
people were fixed only on the Pincian Gate; their ears were open to no
sounds but their own ejaculations of delight.  Not one disguised
stranger only, but many, might now have joined them in their tumultuous
progress, alike unquestioned and unobserved.

So they hastily re-entered the city, where thousands of heavy eyes were
strained to look on them, and thousands of attentive ears drank in
their joyful news from the Gothic camp.  Then were heard in all
directions the sounds of hysterical weeping and idiotic laughter, the
low groans of the weak who died victims of their sudden transport, and
the confused outbursts of the strong who had survived all extremities,
and at last beheld their deliverance in view.

Still silent and serious, the ambassadors now slowly penetrated the
throng on their way back to the Forum; and as they proceeded the crowd
gradually dispersed on either side of them.  Enemies, friends, and
strangers, all whom the ruthless famine had hitherto separated in
interests and sympathies, were now united together as one family, by
the expectation of speedy relief.


But there was one among the assembly that was now separating who stood
alone in her unrevealed emotions, amid the rejoicing thousands around
her.  The women and children in the throng, as, preoccupied by their
own feeling, they unheedfully passed her by, saw not the eager,
ferocious attention in her eyes, as she watched them steadily till they
were out of sight.  Within their gates the stranger and the enemy
waited for the treacherous darkness of night, and waited unobserved.
Where she had first stood when the thick crowd hemmed her in, there she
still continued to stand after they slowly moved past her and space
grew free.

Yet beneath this outward calm and silence lurked the wildest passions
that ever raged against the weak restraint of human will; even the firm
self-possession of Goisvintha was shaken when she found herself within
the walls of Rome.

No glance of suspicion had been cast upon her; not one of the crowd had
approached to thrust her back when she passed through the gates with
the heedless citizens around her.  Shielded from detection, as much by
the careless security of her enemies as by the stratagem of her
disguise, she stood on the pavement of Rome, as she had vowed to stand,
afar from the armies of her people--alone as an avenger of blood!

It was no dream; no fleeting, deceitful vision.  The knife was under
her hand; the streets stretched before her; the living beings who
thronged them were Romans; the hours of the day were already on the
wane; the approach of her vengeance was as sure as the approach of
darkness that was to let it loose.  A wild exultation quickened in her
the pulses of life, while she thought on the dread projects of secret
assassination and revenge which now opposed her, a solitary woman, in
deadly enmity against the defenceless population of a whole city.

As her eyes travelled slowly from side to side over the moving throng;
as she thought on the time that might still elapse ere the discovery
and death--the martyrdom in the cause of blood--which she expected and
defied, would overtake her, her hands trembled beneath her robe, and
she reiterated in whispers to herself:  'Husband, children,
brother--there are five deaths to avenge!  Remember Aquileia!  Remember
Aquileia!'

Suddenly, as she looked from group to group among the departing people,
her eyes became arrested by one object; she instantly stepped forwards,
then abruptly restrained herself and moved back where the crowd was
still thick, gazing fixedly ever in the same direction.  She saw the
victim twice snatched from her hands--at the camp and in the
farm-house--a third time offered to her grasp in the streets of Rome.

The chance of vengeance last expected was the chance that had first
arrived.  A vague, oppressing sensation of awe mingled with the triumph
at her heart--a supernatural guidance seemed to be directing her with
fell rapidity, through every mortal obstacle, to the climax of her
revenge!

She screened herself behind the people; she watched the girl from the
most distant point; but concealment was now vain--their eyes had met.
The robe had slipped aside when she suddenly stepped forward, and in
that moment Antonina had seen her.

Numerian, moving slowly with his daughter through the crowd, felt her
hand tighten round his, and saw her features stiffen into sudden
rigidity; but the change was only for an instant.  Ere he could speak,
she caught him by the arm, and drew him forward with convulsive energy.
Then, in accents hardly articulate, low, breathless, unlike her wonted
voice, he heard her exclaim, as she struggled on with him, 'She is
there--there behind us! to kill me, as she killed him!  Home! home!'

Exhausted already, through long weakness and natural infirmity, by the
rough contact of the crowd, bewildered by Antonina's looks and actions,
and by the startling intimation of unknown peril, conveyed to him in
her broken exclamations of affright, Numerian's first impulse, as he
hurried onward by her side, led him to entreat protection and help from
the surrounding populace.  But even could he have pointed out to them
the object of his dread amid that motley throng of all nations, the
appeal he now made would have remained unanswered.


Of all the results of the frightful severity of privation suffered by
the besieged, none were more common than those mental aberrations which
produced visions of danger, enemies, and death, so palpable as to make
the persons beholding them implore assistance against the hideous
creation of their own delirium.  Accordingly, most of those to whom the
entreaties of Numerian were addressed passed without noticing them.
Some few carelessly bid him remember that there were no enemies now;
that the days of peace were approaching; and that a meal of good food,
which he might soon expect to enjoy, was the only help for a famished
man.  No one, in that period of horror and suffering, which was now
drawing to a close, saw anything extraordinary in the confusion of the
father and the terror of the child.  So they pursued their feeble
flight unprotected, and the footsteps of Goisvintha followed them as
they went.

They had already commenced the ascent of the Pincian Hill, when
Antonina stopped abruptly, and turned to look behind her.  Many people
yet thronged the street below; but her eyes penetrated among them,
sharpened by peril, and instantly discerned the ample robe and the tall
form, still at the same distance from them, and pausing as they had
paused. For one moment, the girl's eyes fixed in the wild, helpless
stare of terror on her father's face; but the next, that mysterious
instinct of preservation, which is co-existent with the instinct of
fear--which gifts the weakest animal with cunning to improve its
flight, and takes the place of reason, reflection, and resolve, when
all are banished from the mind--warned her against the fatal error of
permitting the pursuer to track her to her home.

'Not there! not there!' she gasped faintly as Numerian endeavoured to
lead her up the ascent.  'She will see us as we enter the
doors!--through the streets!  Oh, father, if you would save me! we may
lose her in the streets!--the guards, the people are there!  Back!
back!'

Numerian trembled as he marked the terror in her looks and gestures;
but it was vain to question or oppose her.  Nothing short of force
could restrain her,--no commands or entreaties could draw from her more
than the same breathless exclamation:  'Onward, father; onward, if you
would save me!'  She was insensible to every sensation but fear,
incapable of any other exertion than flight.

Turning and winding, hurrying forward ever at the same rapid pace, they
passed unconsciously along the intricate streets that led to the river
side; and still the avenger tracked the victim, constant as the shadow
to the substance; steady, vigilant, unwearied, as a bloodhound on a hot
scent.

And now, even the sound of the father's voice ceased to be audible in
the daughter's ears; she no longer felt the pressure of his hand, no
longer perceived his very presence at her side.  At length, frail and
shrinking, she again paused, and looked back.  The street they had
reached was very tranquil and desolate:  two slaves were walking at its
further extremity.  While they were in sight, no living creature
appeared in the roadway behind; but as soon as they had passed away, a
shadow stole slowly forward over the pavement of a portico in the
distance, and the next moment Goisvintha appeared in the street.

The sun glared down fiercely over her dark figure as she stopped and
for an instant looked stealthily around her.  She moved to advance, and
Antonina saw no more.  Again she turned to renew her hopeless flight;
and again her father--perceiving only as the mysterious cause of her
dread a solitary woman, who, though she followed, attempted not to
arrest, or even to address them--prepared to accompany her to the last,
in despair of all other chances of securing her safety.

More and more completely did her terror now enchain her faculties, as
she still unconsciously traced her rapid way through the streets that
led to the Tiber.  It was not Numerian, not Rome, not daylight in a
great city, that was before her eyes:  it was the storm, the
assassination, the night at the farm-house, that she now lived through
over again.


Still the quick flight and the ceaseless pursuit were continued, as if
neither were ever to have an end; but the close of the scene was,
nevertheless, already at hand.  During the interval of the passage
through the streets, Numerian's mind had gradually recovered from its
first astonishment and alarm; at length he perceived the necessity of
instant and decisive action, while there was yet time to save Antonina
from sinking under the excess of her own fears.  Though a vague, awful
foreboding of disaster and death filled his heart, his resolution to
penetrate at once, at all hazards, the dark mystery of impending danger
indicated by his daughter's words and actions, did not fail him; for it
was aroused by the only motive powerful enough to revive all that
suffering and infirmity had not yet destroyed of the energy of his
former days--the preservation of his child.  There was something of the
old firmness and vigour of the intrepid reformer of the Church, in his
dim eyes, as he now stopped, and enclosing Antonina in his arms,
arrested her instantly in her flight.

She struggled to escape; but it was faintly, and only for a moment.
Her strength and consciousness were beginning to abandon her.  She
never attempted to look back; she felt in her heart that Goisvintha was
still behind, and dared not to verify the frightful conviction with her
eyes. Her lips moved; but they expressed an altered and a vain
petition: 'Hermanric!  O Hermanric!' was all they murmured now.

They had arrived at the long street that ran by the banks of the Tiber.
The people had either retired to their homes or repaired to the Forum
to be informed of the period when the ransom would be paid.  No one but
Goisvintha was in sight as Numerian looked around him; and she, after
having carefully viewed the empty street, was advancing towards them at
a quickened pace.

For an instant the father looked on her steadily as she approached, and
in that instant his determination was formed.  A flight of steps at his
feet led to the narrow doorway of a small temple, the nearest building
to him.

Ignorant whether Goisvintha might not be secretly supported by
companions in her ceaseless pursuit, he resolved to secure this place
for Antonina, as a temporary refuge at least; while standing before it,
he should oblige the woman to declare her purpose, if she followed them
even there.  In a moment he had begun the ascent of the steps, with the
exhausted girl by his side.  Arrived at the summit, he guided her
before him into the doorway, and stopped on the threshold to look round
again. Goisvintha was nowhere to be seen.

Not duped by the woman's sudden disappearance into the belief that she
had departed from the street--persisting in his resolution to lead his
daughter to a place of repose, where she might most immediately feel
herself secure, and might therefore most readily recover her
self-possession, Numerian drew Antonina with him into the temple.  He
lingered there for a moment, ere he departed to watch the street from
the portico outside.

The light in the building was dim,--it was admitted only from a small
aperture in the roof, and through the narrow doorway, where it was
intercepted by the overhanging bulk of the outer portico. A crooked
pile of dark heavy-looking substances on the floor, rose high towards
the ceiling in the obscure interior.  Irregular in form, flung together
one over the other in strange disorder, for the most part dusky in hue,
yet here and there gleaming at points with a metallic brightness, these
objects presented a mysterious, indefinite, and startling appearance.
It was impossible, on a first view of their confused arrangement, to
discover what they were, or to guess for what purpose they could have
been pile together on the floor of a deserted temple.  From the moment
when they had first attracted Numerian's observation, his attention was
fixed on them, and as he looked a faint thrill of suspicion--vague,
inexplicable, without apparent cause or object--struck chill to his
heart.


He had moved a step forward to examine the hidden space at the back of
the pile, when his further advance was instantly stopped by the
appearance of a man who walked forth from it dressed in the floating,
purple-edged robe and white fillet of the Pagan priests.  Before either
father or daughter could speak, even before they could move to depart,
he stepped up to them, and, placing his hand on the shoulder of each,
confronted them in silence.

At the moment when the stranger approached, Numerian raised his hand to
thrust him back, and, in so doing, fixed his eyes on the man's
countenance, as a ray of light from the doorway floated over it.
Instantly his arm remained outstretched and rigid, then it dropped to
his side, and the expression of horror on the face of the child became
reflected, as it were, on the face of the parent.  Neither moved under
the hand of the dweller in the temple when he laid it heavily on each,
and both stood before him speechless as himself.



CHAPTER 25.

THE TEMPLE AND THE CHURCH.

It was Ulpius.  The Pagan was changed in bearing and countenance as
well as in apparel.  He stood more firm and upright; a dull, tawny hue
overspread his face; his eyes, so sunken and lustreless in other days,
were now distended and bright with the glare of insanity.  It seemed as
if his bodily powers had renewed their vigour, while his mental
faculties had declined towards their ruin.

No human eye had ever beheld by what foul and secret means he had
survived through the famine, on what unnatural sustenance he had
satisfied the cravings of inexorable hunger; but there, in his gloomy
shelter, the madman and the outcast had lived and moved, and suddenly
and strangely strengthened, after the people of the city had exhausted
all their united responses, lavished in vain all their united wealth,
and drooped and died by thousands around him!

His grasp still lay heavy on the father and daughter, and still both
confronted him--silent, as if death-struck by his gaze; motionless, as
if frozen at his touch.  His presence was exerting over them a fatal
fascination.  The power of action, suspended in Antonina as she entered
their ill-chosen refuge, was now arrested in Numerian also; but with
him no thought of the enemy in the street had any part, at this moment,
in the resistless influence which held him helpless before the enemy in
the temple.

It was a feeling of deeper awe and darker horror.  For now, as he
looked upon the hideous features of Ulpius, as he saw the forbidden
robe of priesthood in which the Pagan was arrayed, he beheld not only
the traitor who had successfully plotted against the prosperity of his
household, but the madman as well,--the moral leper of the whole human
family--the living Body and the dead Soul--the disinherited of that
Divine Light of Life which it is the awful privilege of mortal man to
share with the angels of God.

He still clasped Antonina to his side, but it was unconsciously.  To
all outward appearance he was helpless as his helpless child, when
Ulpius slowly removed his grasp from their shoulders, separated them,
and locking the hand of each in his cold, bony fingers, began to speak.

His voice was deep and solemn, but his accents, in their hard,
unvarying tone, seemed to express no human emotion.  His eyes, far from
brightening as he spoke, relapsed into a dull, vacant insensibility.
The connection between the action of speech and the accompanying and
explaining action of look which is observable in all men, seemed lost
in him.  It was fearful to behold the death-like face, and to listen at
the same moment to the living voice.

'Lo! the votaries come to the temple!' murmured the Pagan.  'The good
servants of the mighty worship gather at the voice of the priest!  In
the far provinces, where the enemies of the gods approach to profane
the sacred groves, behold the scattered people congregating by night to
journey to the shrine of Serapis!  Adoring thousands kneel beneath the
lofty porticoes, while within, in the secret hall where the light is
dim, where the air quivers round the breathing deities on their
pedestals of gold, the high priest Ulpius reads the destinies of the
future, that are unrolled before his eyes like a book!'


As he ceased, and, still holding the hands of his captives, looked on
them fixedly as ever, his eyes brightened and dilated again; but they
expressed not the slightest recognition either of father or daughter.
The delirium of his imagination had transported him to the temple at
Alexandria; the days were revived when his glory had risen to its
culminating point, when the Christians trembled before him as their
fiercest enemy, and the Pagans surrounded him as their last hope.  The
victims of his former and forgotten treachery were but as two among the
throng of votaries allured by the fame of his eloquence, by the
triumphant notoriety of his power to protect the adherents of the
ancient creed.

But it was not always thus that his madness declared itself:  there
were moments when it rose to appalling frenzy.  Then he imagined
himself to be again hurling the Christian assailants from the topmost
walls of the besieged temple, in that past time when the image of
Serapis was doomed by the Bishop of Alexandria to be destroyed.  His
yells of fury, his frantic execrations of defiance were heard afar, in
the solemn silence of pestilence-stricken Rome.  Those who, during the
most fatal days of the Gothic blockade, dropped famished on the
pavement before the little temple, as they endeavoured to pass it on
their onward way, presented a dread reality of death, to embody the
madman's visions of battle and slaughter.  As these victims of famine
lay expiring in the street, they heard above them his raving voice
cursing them for Christians, triumphing over them as defeated enemies
destroyed by his hand, exhorting his imaginary adherents to fling the
slain above on the dead below, until the bodies of the besiegers of the
temple were piled, as barriers against their living comrades, round its
walls.  Sometimes his frenzy gloried in the fancied revival of the foul
and sanguinary ceremonies of Pagan superstition.  Then he bared his
arms, and shouted aloud for the sacrifice; he committed dark and
nameless atrocities--for now again the dead and the dying lay before
him, to give substance to the shadow of his evil thoughts; and Plague
and Hunger were as creatures of his will, and slew the victim for the
altar ready to his hands.

At other times, when the raving fit had passed away, and he lay panting
in the darkest corner of the interior of the temple, his insanity
assumed another and a mournful form.  His voice grew low and moaning;
the wreck of his memory--wandering and uncontrollable--floated back,
far back, on the dark waters of the past; and his tongue uttered
fragments of words and phrases that he had murmured at his father's
knees--farewell, childish wishes that he had breathed in his mother's
ear--innocent, anxious questions which he had addressed to Macrinus,
the high priest, when he first entered the service of the gods at
Alexandria. His boyish reveries--the gentleness of speech and poetry of
thought of his first youthful days, were now, by the unsearchable and
arbitrary influences of his disease, revived in his broken words,
renewed in his desolate old age of madness and crime, breathed out in
unconscious mockery by his lips, while the foam still gathered about
them, and the last flashes of frenzy yet lightened in his eyes.

This unnatural calmness of language and vividness of memory, this
treacherous appearance of thoughtful, melancholy self-possession, would
often continue through long periods, uninterrupted; but, sooner or
later, the sudden change came; the deceitful chain of thought snapped
asunder in an instant; the word was left half uttered; the wearied
limbs started convulsively into renewed action; and as the dream of
violence returned and the dream of peace vanished, the madman rioted
afresh in his fury; and journeyed as his visions led him, round and
round his temple sanctuary, and hither and thither, when the night was
dark and death was busiest in Rome, among the expiring in deserted
houses, and the lifeless in the silent streets.


But there were other later events in his existence that never revived
within him.  The old familiar image of the idol Serapis, which had
drawn him into the temple when he re-entered Rome, absorbed in itself
and in its associated remembrances all that remained active of his
paralysed faculties.  His betrayal of his trust in the house of
Numerian, his passage through the rifted wall, his crushing repulse in
the tent of Alaric, never for a moment occupied his wandering thoughts.
The clouds that hung over his mind might open to him parting glimpses
of the toils and triumphs of his early career; but they descended in
impenetrable darkness on all the after-days of his dreary life.

Such was the being to whose will, by a mysterious fatality, the father
and child were now submitted; such the existence--solitary, hopeless,
loathsome--of their stern and wily betrayer of other days!

Since he had ceased speaking, the cold, death-like grasp of his hand
had gradually strengthened, and he had begun to look slowly and
inquiringly round him from side to side.  Had this change marked the
approaching return of his raving paroxysm, the lives of Numerian and
Antonina would have been sacrificed the next moment; but all that it
now denoted was the quickening of the lofty and obscure ideas of
celebrity and success, of priestly honour and influence, of the
splendour and glory of the gods, which had prompted his last words.

He moved suddenly, and drew the victims of his dangerous caprice a few
steps farther into the interior of the temple; then led them close up
to the lofty pile of objects which had first attracted Numerian's eyes
on entering the building.  'Kneel and adore!' cried the madman
fiercely, replacing his hands on their shoulders and pressing them to
the ground--'You stand before the gods, in the presence of their high
priest!'

The girl's head sank forward, and she hid her face in her hands; but
her father looked up tremblingly at the pile.  His eyes had insensibly
become more accustomed to the dim light of the temple, and he now saw
more distinctly the objects composing the mass that rose above him.

Hundreds of images of the gods, in gold, silver, and wood--many in the
latter material being larger than life; canopies, vestments, furniture,
utensils, all of ancient Pagan form, were heaped together, without
order or arrangement, on the floor, to a height of full fifteen feet.

There was something at once hideous and grotesque in the appearance of
the pile.  The monstrous figures of the idols, with their rude carved
draperies and symbolic weapons, lay in every wild variety of position,
and presented every startling eccentricity of line, more especially
towards the higher portions of the mass, where they had evidently been
flung up from the ground by the hand that had raised the structure.

The draperies mixed among the images and the furniture were here coiled
serpent-like around them, and there hung down towards the ground,
waving slow and solemn in the breezes that wound through the temple
doorway. The smaller objects of gold and silver, scattered irregularly
over the mass, shone out from it like gleaming eyes; while the pile
itself, seen in such a place under a dusky light, looked like some
vast, misshapen monster--the gloomy embodiment of the bloodiest
superstitions of Paganism, the growth of damp airs and teeming ruin, of
shadow and darkness, of accursed and infected solitude!

Even in its position, as well as in the objects of which it was
composed, the pile wore an ominous and startling aspect; its crooked
outline, expanding towards the top, was bent over fearfully in the
direction of the doorway; it seemed as if a single hand might sway it
in its uncertain balance, and hurl it instantly in one solid mass to
the floor.

Many toilsome hours had passed away, long secret labour had been
expended in the erection of this weird and tottering structure; but it
was all the work of one hand.  Night after night had the Pagan entered
the deserted temples in the surrounding streets, and pillaged them of
their contents to enrich his favoured shrine:  the removal of the idols
from their appointed places, which would have been sacrilege in any
meaner man, was in his eyes the dread privilege of the high priest
alone.


He had borne heavy burdens, and torn asunder strong fastenings, and
journeyed and journeyed again for hours together over the same gloomy
streets, without loitering in his task; he had raised treasures and
images one above another; he had strengthened the base and heightened
the summit of this precious and sacred heap;  he had repaired and
rebuilt, whenever it crumbled and fell, this new Babel that he longed
to rear to the Olympus of the temple roof, with a resolute patience and
perseverance that no failure or fatigue could overcome.

It was the dearest purpose of his dreamy superstition to surround
himself with innumerable deities, as well as to assemble innumerable
worshippers; to make the sacred place of his habitation a mighty
Pantheon, as well as a point of juncture for the scattered
congregations of the Pagan world.  This was the ambition in which his
madness expanded to the fiercest fanaticism; and as he now stood erect
with his captives beneath him, his glaring eyes looked awe-struck when
he fixed them on his idols; he uplifted his arms in solemn, ecstatic
triumph, and in low tones poured forth his invocations, wild,
intermingled, and fragmentary, as the barbarous altar which his
solitary exertions had reared.

Whatever was the effect on Numerian of his savage and confused
ejaculations, they were unnoticed, even unheard, by Antonina; for now,
while the madman's voice softened to an undertone, and while she hid
all surrounding objects from her eyes, her senses were awakened to
sounds in the temple which she had never remarked before.

The rapid current of the Tiber washed the foundation walls of one side
of the building, within which the clear, lulling bubble of the water
was audible with singular distinctness.  But besides this another and a
shriller sound caught the ear.  On the summit of the temple roof still
remained several rows of little gilt bells, originally placed there,
partly with the intention of ornamenting this portion of the outer
structure, partly in order that the noise they produced, when agitated
by the wind, might scare birds from settling in their flight on the
consecrated edifice.  The sounds produced by these bells were silvery
and high pitched; now, when the breeze was strong, they rang together
merrily and continuously; now, when it fell, their notes were faint,
separate, and irregular, almost plaintive in their pure metallic
softness.  But, however their tone might vary under the capricious
influences of the wind, it seemed always wonderfully mingled within the
temple with the low, eternal bubbling of the river, which filled up the
slightest pauses in the pleasant chiming of the bells, and ever
preserved its gentle and monotonous harmony just audible beneath them.

There was something in this quaint, unwonted combination of sounds, as
they were heard in the vaulted interior of the little building,
strangely simple, attractive, and spiritual; the longer they were
listened to, the more completely did the mind lose the recollection of
their real origin, and gradually shape out of them wilder and wilder
fancies, until the bells as they rang their small peal seemed like
happy voices of a heavenly stream, borne lightly onward on its airy
bubbles, and ever rejoicing over the gliding current that murmured to
them as it ran.

Spite of the peril of her position, and of the terror which still fixed
her speechless and crouching on the ground, the effect on Antonina of
the strange mingled music of the running water and the bells was
powerful enough, when she first heard it, to suspend all her other
emotions in a momentary wonder and doubt.  She withdrew her hands from
her face, and glanced round mechanically to the doorway, as if she
imagined that the sounds proceeded from the street.

When she looked, the declining sun, gliding between two of the outer
pillars which surrounded the temple, covered with a bright glow the
smooth pavement before the entrance.  A swarm of insects flew drowsily
round and round in the warm mellow light; their faint monotonous
humming deepened, rather than interrupted, the perfect silence
prevailing over all things without.


But a change was soon destined to appear in the repose of the quiet,
vacant scene; hardly a minute had elapsed while Antonina still looked
on it before she saw stealing over the sunny pavement a dark shadow,
the same shadow that she had last beheld when she stopped in her flight
to look behind her in the empty street.  At first it slowly grew and
lengthened, then it remained stationary, then it receded and vanished
as gradually as it had advanced, and then the girl heard, or fancied
that she heard, a faint sound of footsteps, retiring along the lateral
colonnades towards the river side of the building.

A low cry of horror burst from her lips as she sank back towards her
father; but it was unheeded.  The voice of Ulpius had resumed in the
interval its hollow loudness of tone; he had raised Numerian from the
ground; his strong, cold grasp, which seemed to penetrate to the old
man's heart, which held him motionless and helpless as if by a fatal
spell, was on his arm.

'Hear it! hear it!' cried the Pagan, waving his disengaged hand as if
he were addressing a vast concourse of people--'I advance this man to
be one of the servants of the high priest!  He has travelled from a far
country to the sacred shrine; he is docile and obedient before the
altar of the gods; the lot is cast for his future life; his dwelling
shall be in the temple to the day of his death!  He shall minister
before me in white robes, and swing the smoking censer, and slay the
sacrifice at my feet!'

He stopped.  A dark and sinister expression appeared in his eyes as the
word 'sacrifice' passed his lips; he muttered doubtingly to
himself--'The sacrifice!--is it yet the hour of the sacrifice?'--and
looked round towards the doorway.

The sun still shone gaily on the outer pavement; the insects still
circled slowly in the mellow light; no shadow was now visible; no
distant footsteps were heard; there was nothing audible but the happy
music of the bubbling water, and the chiming, silvery bells.

For a few moments the madman looked out anxiously towards the street,
without uttering a word or moving a muscle.  The raving fit was nearly
possessing him again, as the thought of the sacrifice flashed over his
darkened mind; but once more its approach was delayed.

He slowly turned his head in the direction of the interior of the
temple.  'The sun is still bright in the outer courts,' he murmured in
an undertone, 'the hour of the sacrifice is not yet!  Come!' he
continued in a louder voice, shaking Numerian by the arm.  'It is time
that the servant of the temple should behold the place of the
sacrifice, and sharpen the knife for the victim before sunset!  Arouse
thee, bondman, and follow me!'

As yet, Numerian had neither spoken, nor attempted to escape.  The
preceding events, though some space has been occupied in describing
them, passed in so short a period of time, that he had not hitherto
recovered from the first overwhelming shock of the meeting with Ulpius.
But now, awed though he still was, he felt that the moment of the
struggle for freedom had arrived.

'Leave me, and let us depart!--there can be no fellowship between us
again!' he exclaimed with the reckless courage of despair, taking the
hand of Antonina, and striving to free himself from the madman's grasp.
But the effort was vain; Ulpius tightened his hold and laughed in
triumph.  'What! the servant of the temple is in terror of the high
priest, and shrinks from walking in the place of the sacrifice!' he
cried.  'Fear not, bondman!  The mighty one, who rules over life and
death, and time and futurity, deals kindly with the servant of his
choice!  Onward! onward! to the place of darkness and doom, where I
alone am omnipotent, and all others are creatures who tremble and obey!
To thy lesson, learner! by sunset the victim must be crowned!'

He looked round on Numerian for an instant, as he prepared to drag him
forward, and their eyes met.  In the fierce command of his action, and
the savage exultation of his glance, the father saw repeated in a
wilder form the very attitude and expression which he had beheld in the
Pagan on the morning of the loss of his child.  All the circumstances
of that miserable hour--the vacant bed-chamber--the banished
daughter--the triumph of the betrayer--the anguish of the
betrayed--rushed over his mind, and rose up before it vivid as a
pictured scene before his eyes.


He struggled no more; the powers of resistance in mind and body were
crushed alike.  He made an effort to remove Antonina from his side, as
if, in forgetfulness of the hidden enemy without, he designed to urge
her flight through the open door, while the madman's attention was yet
distracted from her.  But, beyond this last exertion of the strong
instinct of paternal love, every other active emotion seemed dead
within him.

Vainly had he striven to disentangle the child from the fate that might
be in store for the parent.  To her the dread of the dark shadow on the
pavement was superior to all other apprehensions.  She now clung more
closely to her father, and tightened her clasp round his hand.  So,
when the Pagan advanced into the interior of the temple, it was not
Numerian alone who followed him to the place of sacrifice, but Antonina
as well.

They moved to the back of the pile of idols.  Behind it appeared a high
partition of gilt and inlaid wood reaching to the ceiling, and
separating the outer from the inner part of the temple.  A low archway
passage, protected by carved gates similar to those at the front of the
building, had been formed in the partition, and through this Ulpius and
his prisoners now passed into the recess beyond.

This apartment was considerably smaller than the first hall of the
temple which they had just left.  The ceiling and the floor both sloped
downwards together, and here the rippling of the waters of the Tiber
was more distinctly audible to them than in the outer division of the
building.  At the moment when they entered it the place was very dark;
the pile of idols intercepted even the little light that could have
been admitted through its narrow entrance; but the dense obscurity was
soon dissipated. Dragging Numerian after him to the left side of the
recess, Ulpius drew back a sort of wooden shutter, and a vivid ray of
sunlight immediately streamed in through a small circular opening
pierced in this part of the temple.

Then there became apparent, at the lower end of the apartment, a vast
yawning cavity in the wall, high enough to admit a man without
stooping, but running downwards almost perpendicularly to some lower
region which it was impossible to see, for no light shot upwards from
this precipitous artificial abyss, in the darkness of which the eye was
lost after it had penetrated to the distance of a few feet only from
the opening.  At the base of the confined space thus visible appeared
the commencement of a flight of steps, evidently leading far downwards
into the cavity.  On the abruptly sloping walls, which bounded it on
all sides, were painted, in the brilliant hues of ancient fresco,
representations of the deities of the mythology--all in the attitude of
descending into the vault, and all followed by figures of nymphs
bearing wreaths of flowers, beautiful birds, and other similar adjuncts
of the votive ceremonies of Paganism.  The repulsive contrast between
the bright colours and graceful forms presented by the frescoes, and
the perilous and gloomy appearance of the cavity which they decorated,
increased remarkably the startling significance in the character of the
whole structure.  Its past evil uses seemed ineradicably written over
every part of it, as past crime and torment remain ineradicably written
on the human face; the mind imbibed from it terrifying ideas of deadly
treachery, of secret atrocities, of frightful refinements of torture,
which no uninitiated eye had ever beheld, and no human resolution had
ever been powerful enough to resist.

But the impressions thus received were not produced only by what was
seen in and around this strange vault, but by what was heard there
besides.  The wind penetrated the cavity at some distance, and through
some opening that could not be beheld, and was apparently intercepted
in its passage, for it whistled upwards towards the entrance in shrill,
winding notes, sometimes producing another and nearer sound, resembling
the clashing of many small metallic substances violently shaken
together.  The noise of the wind, as well as the bubbling of the
current of the Tiber, seemed to proceed from a greater distance than
appeared compatible with the narrow extent of the back part of the
temple, and the proximity of the river to its low foundation walls.


It was evident that the vault only reached its outlet after it had
wound backwards, underneath the building, in some strange complication
of passages or labyrinth of artificial caverns, which might have been
built long since as dungeons for the living, or as sepulchres for the
dead.

'The place of the sacrifice--aha! the place of the sacrifice!' cried
the Pagan exultingly, as he drew Numerian to the entrance of the
cavity, and solemnly pointed into the darkness beneath.

The father gazed steadily into the chasm, never turning now to look on
Antonina, never moving to renew the struggle for freedom.  Earthly
loves and earthly hopes began to fade away from his heart--he was
praying. The solemn words of Christian supplication fell in low,
murmuring sounds from his lips, in the place of idolatry and bloodshed,
and mingled with the incoherent ejaculations of the madman who kept him
captive, and who now bent his glaring eyes on the darkness of the
vault, half forgetful, in the gloomy fascination which it exercised
even over him, of the prisoners whom he held at its mouth.

The single ray of light, admitted from the circular aperture of the
wall, fell wild and fantastic over the widely-differing figures of the
three, as they stood so strangely united together before the abyss that
opened beneath them.  The shadows were above and the shadows were
around; there was no light in the ill-omened place but the one vivid
ray that streamed over the gaunt figure of Ulpius, as he still pointed
into the darkness; over the rigid features of Numerian, praying in the
bitterness of expected death; and over the frail youthful form of
Antonina as she nestled trembling at her father's side.  It was an
unearthly and a solemn scene!

Meanwhile the shadow which the girl had observed on the pavement before
the doorway of the temple now appeared there again, but not to retire
as before;  for, the instant after, Goisvintha stealthily entered the
outer apartment of the building left vacant by its first occupants.
She passed softly around the pile of idols, looked into the inner
recess of the temple, and saw the three figures standing together in
the ray of light, gloomy and motionless, before the mouth of the
cavity.  Her first glance fixed on the Pagan, whom she instinctively
doubted and dreaded, whose purpose in keeping captive the father and
daughter she could not divine; her next was directed on Antonina.

The girl's position was a guarded one; still holding her father's hand,
she was partly protected by his body; and stood unconsciously beneath
the arm of Ulpius, as it was raised while he grasped Numerian's
shoulder.  Marking this, and remembering that Antonina had twice
escaped her already, Goisvintha hesitated for a moment, and then, with
cautious step and lowering brow, began to retire again towards the
doorway of the building.  'Not yet--not yet the time!' she muttered, as
she resumed her former lurking-place; 'they stand where the light is
over them--the girl is watched and shielded--the two men are still on
either side of her! Not yet the moment of the blow; the stroke of the
knife must be sure and safe!  Sure, for this time she must die by my
hand!  Safe, for I have other vengeance to wreak besides the vengeance
on her!  I, who have been patient and cunning since the night when I
escaped from Aquileia, will be patient and cunning still!  If she
passes the door, I slay her as she goes out; if she remains in the
temple--'

At the last word, Goisvintha paused and gazed upward; the setting sun
threw its fiery glow over her haggard face; her eye brightened fiercely
in the full light as she looked.  'The darkness is at hand!' she
continued; 'the night will be thick and black in the dim halls of the
temple; I shall see her when she shall not see me!--the darkness is
coming; the vengeance is sure!'

She closed her lips, and with fatal perseverance continued to watch and
wait, as she had resolutely watched and waited already.  The Roman and
the Goth; the opposite in sex, nation, and fate; the madman who dreamed
of the sanguinary superstitions of Paganism before the temple altar,
and the assassin who brooded over the chances of bloodshed beneath the
temple portico, were now united in a mysterious identity of
expectation, uncommunicated and unsuspected by either--the hour when
the sun vanished from the heaven was the hour of the sacrifice for both!

      *      *      *      *      *

There is now a momentary pause in the progress of events.  Occurrences
to be hereafter related render it necessary to take advantage of this
interval to inform the reader of the real nature and use of the vault
in the temple wall, the external appearance of which we have already
described.

The marking peculiarity in the construction of the Pagan religion may
be most aptly compared to the marking peculiarity in the construction
of the pagan temples.  Both were designed to attract the general eye by
the outward effect only, which was in both the false delusive
reflection of the inward substance.

In the temple, the people, as they worshipped beneath the long
colonnades, or beheld the lofty porticoes from the street, were left to
imagine the corresponding majesty and symmetry of the interior of the
structure, and were not admitted to discover how grievously it
disappointed the brilliant expectations which the exterior was so well
calculated to inspire; how little the dark, narrow halls of the idols,
the secret vaults and gloomy recesses within, fulfilled the promise of
the long flights of steps, the broad extent of pavement, the massive
sun-brightened pillars without.  So in the religion, the votary was
allured by the splendour of processions; by the pomp of auguries; by
the poetry of the superstition which peopled his native woods with the
sportive Dryads, and the fountains from which he drank with their
guardian Naiads; which gave to mountain and lake, to sun and moon and
stars, to all things around and above him, their fantastic allegory, or
their gracious legend of beauty and love:  but beyond this, his first
acquaintance with his worship was not permitted to extend, here his
initiation concluded.  He was kept in ignorance of the dark and
dangerous depths which lurked beneath this smooth and attractive
surface; he was left to imagine that what was displayed was but the
prelude to the future discovery of what was hidden of beauty in the
rites of Paganism; he was not admitted to behold the wretched
impostures, the loathsome orgies, the hideous incantations, the bloody
human sacrifices perpetrated in secret, which made the foul, real
substance of the fair exterior form.  His first sight of the temple was
not less successful in deceiving his eye than his first impression of
the religion in deluding his mind.

With these hidden and guilty mysteries of the Pagan worship, the vault
before which Ulpius now stood with his captives was intimately
connected.

The human sacrifices offered among the Romans were of two kinds; those
publicly and those privately performed.  The first were of annual
recurrence in the early years of the Republic; were prohibited at a
later date; were revived by Augustus, who sacrificed his prisoners of
war at the altar of Julius Caesar; and were afterwards--though
occasionally renewed for particular purposes under some subsequent
reigns--wholly abandoned as part of the ceremonies of Paganism during
the later periods of the empire.

The sacrifices perpetrated in private were much longer practised.  They
were connected with the most secret mysteries of the mythology; were
concealed from the supervision of government; and lasted probably until
the general extinction of heathen superstition in Italy and the
provinces.

Many and various were the receptacles constructed for the private
immolation of human victims in different parts of the empire--in its
crowded cities as well as in its solitary woods--and among all, one of
the most remarkable and the longest preserved was the great cavity
pierced in the wall of the temple which Ulpius had chosen for his
solitary lurking-place in Rome.


It was not merely as a place of concealment for the act of immolation,
and for the corpse of the victim, that the vault had been built.  A
sanguinary artifice had complicated the manner of its construction, by
placing in the cavity itself the instrument of the sacrifice; by making
it, as it were, not merely the receptacle, but the devourer also of its
human prey.  At the bottom of the flight of steps leading down into it
(the top of which, as we have already observed, was alone visible from
the entrance in the temple recess) was fixed the image of a dragon
formed in brass.

The body of the monster, protruding opposite the steps almost at a
right angle from the wall, was moved in all directions by steel
springs, which communicated with one of the lower stairs, and also with
a sword placed in the throat of the image to represent the dragon's
tongue.  The walls around the steps narrowed so as barely to admit the
passage of the human body when they approached the dragon.  At the
slightest pressure on the stair with which the spring communicated, the
body of the monster bent forward, and the sword instantly protruded
from its throat, at such a height from the steps as ensure that it
should transfix in a vital part the person who descended.  The corpse,
then dropping by its own weight off the sword, fell through a tunnelled
opening beneath the dragon, running downward in an opposite direction
to that taken by the steps above, and was deposited on an iron grating
washed by the waters of the Tiber, which ran under the arched
foundations of the temple.  The grating was approached by a secret
subterranean passage leading from the front of the building, by which
the sacrificing priests were enabled to reach the dead body, to fasten
weights to it, and opening the grating, to drop it into the river,
never to be beheld again by mortal eyes.

In the days when this engine of destruction was permitted to serve the
purpose for which the horrible ingenuity of its inventors had
constructed it, its principal victims were young girls.  Crowned with
flowers, and clad in white garments, they were lured into immolating
themselves by being furnished with rich offerings, and told that the
sole object of their fatal expedition down the steps of the vault was
to realise the pictures adorning its walls (which we have described a
few pages back), by presenting their gifts at the shrine of the idol
below.

At the period of which we write, the dragon had for many years--since
the first prohibitions of Paganism--ceased to be fed with its wonted
prey.  The scales forming its body grew gradually corroded and loosened
by the damp; and when moved by the wind which penetrated to them from
beneath, whistling up in its tortuous course through the tunnel that
ran in one direction below, and the vault of the steps that ascended in
another above, produced the clashing sound which has been mentioned as
audible at intervals from the mouth of the cavity.  But the springs
which moved the deadly apparatus of the whole machine being placed
within it, under cover, continued to resist the slow progress of time
and of neglect, and still remained as completely fitted as ever to
execute the fatal purpose for which they had been designed.

The ultimate destiny of the dragon of brass was the destiny of the
religion whose bloodiest superstitions it embodied:  it fell beneath
the resistless advance of Christianity.  Shortly after the date of our
narrative, the interior of the building beneath which it was placed
having suffered from an accident, which will be related farther on, the
exterior was dismantled, in order that its pillars might furnish
materials for a church.  The vault in the wall was explored by a monk
who had been present at the destruction of other Pagan temples, and who
volunteered to discover its contents.  With a torch in one hand, and an
iron bar in the other, he descended into the cavity, sounding the walls
and the steps before him as he proceeded.  For the first and the last
time the sword protruded harmless from the monster's throat when the
monk pressed the fatal stair, before stepping on it, with his iron bar.
The same day the machine was destroyed and cast into the Tiber, where
its victims had been thrown before it in former years.

      *      *      *      *      *


Some minutes have elapsed since we left the father and daughter
standing by the Pagan's side before the mouth of the vault; and as yet
there appears no change in the several positions of the three.  But
already, while Ulpius still looks down steadfastly into the cavity at
his feet, his voice, as he continues to speak, grows louder, and his
words become more distinct.  Fearful recollections associated with the
place are beginning to stir his weary memory, to lift the darkness of
oblivion from his idle thoughts.

'They go down, far down there!' he abruptly exclaimed, pointing into
the black depths of the vault, 'and never arise again to the light of
the upper earth!  The great Destroyer is watchful in his solitude
beneath, and looks through the darkness for their approach!  Hark! the
hissing of his breath is like to the clash of weapons in a deadly
strife!'

At this moment the wind moved the loose scales of the dragon.  During
an instant Ulpius remained silent, listening to the noise they
produced. For the first time an expression of dread appeared on his
face.  His memory was obscurely reviving the incidents of his discovery
of the deadly machinery in the vault when he first made his sojourn in
the temple, when--filled with the confused remembrance of the
mysterious rites and incantations, the secret sacrifices which he had
witnessed and performed at Alexandria--he had found and followed the
subterranean passage which led to the iron grating beneath the dragon.
As the wind lulled again, and the clashing of the metal ceased with it,
he began to give these recollections expression in words, uttering them
in slow, solemn accents to himself.

'I have seen the Destroyer; the Invisible has revealed himself to me!'
he murmured.  'I stood on the iron bars; the restless waters toiled and
struggled beneath my feet as I looked up into the place of darkness.  A
voice called to me, "Get light, and behold me from above!  Get light!
get light!"  Sun, and moon, and stars gave no light there! but lamps
burnt in the city, in the houses of the dead, when I walked by them in
the night-time; and the lamp gave light when sun, and moon, and stars
gave none! From the top steps I looked down, and saw the Powerful One
in his golden brightness; and approached not, but watched and listened
in fear.  The voice again!--the voice was heard again!--"Sacrifice to
me in secret, as thy brethren sacrifice!  Give me the living where the
living are, and the dead where the dead!"  The air came up cold, and
the voice ceased, and the lamp was like sun, and moon, and stars--it
gave no light in the place of darkness!'

While he spoke, the loose metal again clashed in the vault, for the
wind was strengthening as the evening advanced.  'Hark! the signal to
prepare the sacrifice!' cried the Pagan, turning abruptly to Numerian.
'Listen, bondman! the living and the dead are within our reach.  The
breath of the Invisible strikes them in the street and in the house;
they stagger in the highways, and drop at the temple steps.  When the
hour comes we shall go forth and find them.  Under my hand they go down
into the cavern beneath.  Whether they are hurled dead, or whether they
go down living, they fall through to the iron bars, where the water
leaps and rejoices to receive them!  It is mine to sacrifice them
above, and thine to wait for them below, to lift the bars and give them
to the river to be swallowed up!  The dead drop down first, the living
that are slain by the Destroyer follow after!'

Here he paused suddenly.  Now, for the first time, his eye rested on
Antonina, whose very existence he seemed hitherto to have forgotten.  A
revolting smile of mingled cunning and satisfaction instantly changed
the whole character of his countenance as he gazed on her and then
looked round significantly to the vault.  'Here is one,' he whispered
to Numerian, taking her by the arm.  'Keep her captive--the hour is
near!'

Numerian had hitherto stood unheedful while he spoke; but when he
touched Antonina the bare action was enough to arouse the father to
resistance--hopeless though it was--once more.  He shook off the grasp
of Ulpius from the girl's arm, and drew back with her--breathless,
vigilant, desperate--to the side-wall behind him.

The madman laughed in proud approval.  'My bondman obeys me and seizes
the captive!' he cried. 'He remembers that the hour is near and loosens
not his hold!  Come,' he continued, 'come out into the hall beyond!--it
is time that we watch for more victims for the sacrifice till the sun
goes down.  The Destroyer is mighty and must be obeyed!'


He walked to the entrance leading into the first apartment of the
temple, and then waited to be followed by Numerian, who, now for the
first time separated from Ulpius, remained stationary in the position
he had last occupied, and looked eagerly around him.  No chance of
escape presented itself; the mouth of the vault on one side, and the
passage through the partition on the other, were the only outlets to
the place. There was no hope but to follow the Pagan into the great
hall of the temple, to keep carefully at a distance from him, and to
watch the opportunity of flight through the doorway. The street, so
desolate when last beheld, might now afford more evidence that it was
inhabited. Citizens, guards might be passing by, and might be summoned
into the temple--help might be at hand.

As he moved forward with Antonina, such thoughts passed rapidly through
the father's mind, unaccompanied at the moment by the recollection of
the stranger who had followed them from the Pincian Gate, or of the
apathy of the famished populace in aiding each other in any emergency.
Seeing that he was followed as he had commanded, Ulpius passed on
before them to the pile of idols; but a strange and sudden alteration
appeared in his gait.  He had hitherto walked with the step of a
man--young, strong, and resolute of purpose; now he dragged one limb
after the other as slowly and painfully as if he had received a mortal
hurt.  He tottered with more than the infirmity of his age, his head
dropped upon his breast, and he moaned and murmured inarticulately in
low, long-drawn cries.

He had advanced to the side of the pile, half-way towards the doorway
of the temple, when Numerian, who had watched with searching eyes the
abrupt change in his demeanour, forgetting the dissimulation which
might still be all-important, abandoned himself to his first impulse,
and hurriedly pressing forward with Antonina, attempted to pass the
Pagan and escape.  But at the moment Ulpius stopped in his slow
progress, reeled, threw out his hands convulsively, and seizing
Numerian by the arm, staggered back with him against the side-wall of
the temple.  The fingers of the tortured wretch closed as if they were
never to be unlocked again--closed as if with the clutch of death, with
the last frantic grasp of a drowning man.

For days and nights past he had toiled incessantly under the relentless
tyranny of his frenzy, building up higher and higher his altar of
idols, and pouring forth his invocations before his gods in the place
of the sacrifice; and now, at the moment when he was most triumphant in
his ferocious activity of purpose, when his fancied bondman and his
fancied victim were most helpless at his command--now, when his
strained faculties were strung to their highest pitch, the
long-deferred paroxysm had seized him, which was the precursor of his
repose, of the only repose granted by his awful fate--a change (the
mournful change already described) in the form of his insanity.  For at
those rare periods when he slept, his sleep was not unconsciousness,
not rest:  it was a trance of hideous dreams--his tongue spoke, his
limbs moved, when he slumbered as when he woke.  It was only when his
visions of the pride, the power, the fierce conflicts, and daring
resolutions of his maturer years gave place to his dim, quiet, waking
dreams of his boyish days, that his wasted faculties reposed, and his
body rested with them in the motionless languor of perfect fatigue.
Then, if words were still uttered by his lips, they were as murmurs of
an infant--happy sleep; for the innocent phrases of his childhood which
they then revived, seemed for a time to bring with them the innocent
tranquillity of his childhood as well.

'Go! go!--fly while you are yet free!' cried Numerian, dropping the
hand of Antonina, and pointing to the door.  But for the second time
the girl refused to move forward a step.  No horror, no peril in the
temple could banish for an instant her remembrance of the night at the
farm-house in the suburbs. She kept her head turned towards the vacant
entrance, fixed her eyes on it in the unintermitting watchfulness of
terror, and whispered affrightedly, 'Goisvintha!  Goisvintha!' when her
father spoke.


The clasp of the Pagan's fingers remained fixed and deathlike as at
first; he leaned back against the wall, as still as if life and action
had for ever departed from him.  The paroxysm had passed away; his
face, distorted but the moment before, was now in repose, but it was a
repose that was awful to look on.  Tears rolled slowly from his
half-closed eyes over his seamed and wrinkled cheeks--tears which were
not the impressive expression of mental anguish (for a vacant and
unchanging smile was on his lips), but the mere mechanical outburst of
the physical weakness that the past crisis of agony had left behind it.
Not the slightest appearance of thought or observation was perceptible
in his features: his face was the face of an idiot.

Numerian, who had looked on him for an instant, shuddered and averted
his eyes, recoiling from the sight before him.  But a more overpowering
trial of his resolution was approaching, which he could not avoid.  Ere
long the voice of Ulpius grew audible once more; but now its tones were
weak, piteous, almost childish, and the words they uttered were quiet
words of love and gentleness, which dropping from such lips, and
pronounced in such a place, were fearful to hear.  The temple and all
that was in it vanished from his sight as from his memory.  Swayed by
the dread and supernatural influences of his disease, the madman passed
back in an instant over the dark valley of life's evil pilgrimage to
the long-quitted precincts of his boyish home.  While in bodily
presence he stood in the place of his last crimes, the outcast of
reason and humanity, in mental consciousness he lay in his mother's
arms, as he had lain there ere yet he had departed to the temple at
Alexandria; and his heart communed with her heart, and his eyes looked
on her as they had looked before his father's fatal ambition had
separated for ever parent and child!

'Mother!--come back, mother!' he whispered.  'I was not asleep:  I saw
you when you came in, and sat by my bedside, and wept over me when you
kissed me!  Come back, and sit by me still!  I am going away, far away,
and may never hear your voice again!  How happy we should be, mother,
if I stayed with you always!  But it is my father's will that I should
go to the temple in another country, and live there to be a priest; and
his will must be obeyed.  I may never return; but we shall not forget
one another!  I shall remember your words when we used to talk together
happily, and you shall still remember mine!'

Hardly had the first sentence been uttered by Ulpius when Antonina felt
her father's whole frame suddenly tremble at her side.  She turned her
eyes from the doorway, on which they had hitherto been fixed, and
looked on him.  The Pagan's hand had fallen from his arm:  he was free
to depart, to fly as he had longed to fly but a few minutes before, and
yet he never stirred.  His daughter touched him, spoke to him, but he
neither moved nor answered.  It was not merely the shock of the abrupt
transition in the language of Ulpius from the ravings of crime to the
murmurs of love--it was not merely astonishment at hearing from him, in
his madness, revelations of his early life which had never passed his
lips during his days of treacherous servitude in the house on the
Pincian Hill, that thus filled Numerian's inmost soul with awe, and
struck his limbs motionless.  There was more in all that he heard than
this.  The words seemed as words that had doomed him at once and for
ever.  His eyes, directed full on the face of the madman, were dilated
with horror, and his deep, gasping, convulsive breathings mingled
heavily, during the moment of silence that ensued, with the chiming of
the bells above and the bubbling of the water below--the lulling music
of the temple, playing its happy evening hymn at the pleasant close of
day.

'We shall remember, mother!--we shall remember!' continued the Pagan
softly, 'and be happy in our remembrances!  My brother, who loves me
not, will love you when I am gone!  You will walk in my little garden,
and think on me as you look at the flowers that we have planted and
watered together in the evening hours, when the sky was glorious to
behold, and the earth was all quiet around us! Listen, mother, and kiss
me!  When I go to the far country, I will make a garden there like my
garden here, and plant the same flowers that we have planted here, and
in the evening I will go out and give them water at the hour when you
go out to give my flowers water at home; and so, though we see each
other no more, it will yet be as if we laboured together in the garden
as we labour now!'


The girl still fixed her eager gaze on her father.  His eyes presented
the same rigid expression of horror; but he was now wiping off with his
own hand, mechanically, as if he knew it not, the foam which the
paroxysms had left round the madman's lips, and, amid the groans that
burst from him, she could hear such words as, 'Lord God!--mercy, Lord
God!  Thou, who hast thus restored him to me--thus, worse than
dead!--mercy! mercy!'

The light on the pavement beneath the portico of the temple was fading
visibly--the sun had gone down.

For the third time the madman spoke, but his tones were losing their
softness; they were complaining, plaintive, unutterably mournful; his
dreams of the past were already changing.  'Farewell, brother--farewell
for years and years!' he cried.  'You have not given me the love that I
gave you.  The fault was not mine that our father loved me the best,
and chose me to be sent to the temple to be a priest at the altar of
the gods!  The fault was not mine that I partook not in your favoured
sports, and joined not the companions whom you sought; it was our
father's will that I should not live as you lived, and I obeyed it!
You have spoken to me in anger, and turned from me in disdain; but
farewell again, Cleander--farewell in forgiveness and in love!'

He might have spoken more, but his voice was drowned in one long shriek
of agony which burst from Numerian's lips, and echoed discordantly
through the hall of the temple, and he sank down with his face to the
ground at the Pagan's feet.  The dark and terrible destiny was
fulfilled.  The enthusiast for the right and the fanatic for the wrong;
the man who had toiled to reform the Church, and the man who had toiled
to restore the Temple; the master who had received and trusted the
servant in his home, and the servant who in that home had betrayed the
master's trust--the two characters, separated hitherto in the sublime
disunion of good and bad, now struck together in tremendous contact, as
brethren who had drawn their life from one source, who as children had
been sheltered under the same roof!

Not in the hours when the good Christian succoured the then forsaken
Pagan, wandering homeless in Rome, was the secret disclosed; no chance
word of it was uttered when the deceiver told the feigned relation of
his life to the benefactor whom he was plotting to deceive, or when, on
the first morning of the siege, the machinations of the servant
triumphed over the confidence of the master: it was reserved to be
revealed in the words of delirium, at the closing years of madness,
when he who discovered it was unconscious of all that he spoke, and his
eyes were blinded to the true nature of all that he saw; when earthly
voices that might once have called him back to repentance, to
recognition, and to love, were become to him as sounds that have no
meaning; when, by a ruthless and startling fatality, it was on the
brother who had wrought for the true faith that the whole crushing
weight of the terrible disclosure fell, unpartaken by the brother who
had wrought for the false!  But the judgments pronounced in Time go
forth from the tribunal of that Eternity to which the mysteries of life
tend, and in which they shall be revealed--neither waiting on human
seasons nor abiding by human justice, but speaking to the soul in the
language of immortality, which is heard in the world that is now, and
interpreted in the world that is to come.

Lost, for an instant, even the recollection that Goisvintha might still
be watching her opportunity from without, calling despairingly on her
father, and vainly striving to raise him from the ground, Antonina
remembered not, in the overwhelming trial of the moment, the
revelations of Numerian's past life that had been disclosed to her in
the days when the famine was at its worst in Rome.  The name of
'Cleander', which she had then heard her father pronounce, as the name
that he had abandoned when he separated himself from the companions of
his sinful choice, passed unheeded by her when the Pagan unconsciously
uttered it.  She saw the whole scene but as a fresh menace of danger,
as a new vision of terror, more ominous of ill than all that had
preceded it.


Thick as was the darkness in which the lulling and involuntary memories
of the past had enveloped the perceptions of Ulpius, the father's
piercing cry of anguish seemed to have penetrated it with a sudden ray
of light.  The madman's half-closed eyes opened instantly and fixed,
dreamily at first, on the altar of idols.  He waved his hands to and
fro before him, as if he were parting back the folds of a heavy veil
that obscured his sight; but his wayward thoughts did not resume as yet
their old bias towards ferocity and crime.  When he spoke again, his
speech was still inspired by the visions of his early life--but now of
his early life in the temple at Alexandria.  His expressions were more
abrupt, more disjointed than before; yet they continued to display the
same evidence of the mysterious, instinctive vividness of recollection,
which was the result of the sudden change in the nature of his
insanity. His language wandered (still as if the words came from him
undesignedly and unconsciously) over the events of his boyish
introduction to the service of the gods, and, though confusing them in
order, still preserved them in substance, as they have been already
related in the history of his 'apprenticeship to the temple'.

Now he was in imagination looking down once more from the summit of the
Temple of Serapis on the glittering expanse of the Nile and the wide
country around it; and now he was walking proudly through the streets
of Alexandria by the side of his uncle, Macrinus, the high priest.  Now
he was wandering at night, in curiosity and awe, through the gloomy
vaults and subterranean corridors of the sacred place; and now he was
listening, well pleased, to the kindly greeting, the inspiring praises
of Macrinus during their first interview.  But at this point, and while
dwelling on this occasion, his memory became darkened again; it vainly
endeavoured to retrace the circumstances attending the crowning
evidence of the high priest's interest in his pupil, and anxiety to
identify him completely with his new protector and his new duties,
which had been displayed when he conferred on the trembling boy the
future distinction of one of his own names.

And here, let it be remembered, as a chief link in the mysterious chain
of fatalities which had united to keep the brothers apart as brethren
after they had met as men, that both had, from widely different causes,
abandoned in after-life the names which they bore in their father's
house; that while one, by his own act and for his own purpose,
transformed himself from Cleander, the associate of the careless and
the criminal, to Numerian, the preacher of the Gospel and reformer of
the Church, the other had (to quote the words of the fourth chapter),
'become from the boy Emilius the student Ulpius,' by the express and
encouraging command of his master, Macrinus, the high priest.

While the Pagan still fruitlessly endeavoured to revive the events
connected with the change in his designation on his arrival in
Alexandria, and, chafing under the burden of oblivion that weighed upon
his thoughts, attempted for the first time to move from the wall
against which he had hitherto leaned; while Antonina still strove in
vain to recall her father to the recollection of the terrible
exigencies of the moment as he crouched prostrate at the madman's
feet--the doorway of the temple was darkened once more by the figure of
Goisvintha.  She stood on the threshold, a gloomy and indistinct form
in the fading light, looking intently into the deeply shadowed interior
of the building. As she marked the altered positions of the father and
daughter, she uttered a suppressed ejaculation of triumph; but, while
the sound passed her lips, she heard, or thought she heard, a noise in
the street behind.  Even now her vigilance and cunning, her deadly,
calculating resolution to await in immovable patience the fitting time
for striking the blow deliberately and with impunity, did not fail her.
Turning instantly, she walked to the top step of the temple, and stood
there for a few moments, watchfully surveying the open space before her.


But in those few moments the scene in the building changed once more.
The madman, while he still wavered between relapsing into the raving
fit and continuing under the influence of the tranquil mood in which he
had been prematurely disturbed, caught sight of Goisvintha when her
approach suddenly shadowed the entrance to the temple.  Her presence,
momentary though it was, was for him the presence of a figure that had
not appeared before; that had stood in a strange position between the
shade within and the faint light without; it was a new object,
presented to his eyes while they were straining to recover such
imperfect faculties of observation as had been their wont, and it
ascendancy over him was instantaneous and all-powerful.

He started, bewildered like a deep sleeper suddenly awoke; violent
shudderings ran for a moment over his frame; then it strengthened again
with its former unnatural strength; the demon raged within him in
renewed fury as he tore his robe which Numerian held as he lay at his
feet from the feeble grasp that confined it, and, striding up to the
pile of idols, stretched out his hands in solemn deprecation.  'The
high priest has slept before the altar of the gods!' he cried loudly,
'but they have been patient with their well-beloved; their thunder has
not struck him for his crime!  Now the servant returns to his
service--the rites of Serapis begin!'

Numerian still remained prostrate, spirit-broken; he slowly clasped his
hands together on the floor, and his voice was now to be heard, still
supplicating in low and stifled accents, as if in unceasing prayer lay
his last hope of preserving his own reason.  'God!  Thou art the God of
Mercy; be merciful to him!' he murmured.  'Thou acceptest of
repentance; grant repentance to him!  If at any time I have served Thee
without blame, let the service be counted to him; let the vials of Thy
wrath be poured out on me!'

'Hark! the trumpet blows for the sacrifice!' interrupted the raving
voice of the Pagan, as he turned from the altar, and extended his arms
in frenzied inspiration.  'The roar of music and the voice of
exultation soar upward from the highest mountain-tops!  The incense
smokes, and in and out, and round and round, the dancers whirl about
the pillars of the temple!  The ox for the sacrifice is without spot;
his horns are gilt; the crown and fillet adorn his head.  The priest
stands before him naked from the waist upwards; he heaves the libation
out of the cup; the blood flows over the altar! Up! up! tear forth with
reeking hands the heart while it is yet warm, futurity is before you in
the quivering entrails, look on them and read! read!'

While he spoke, Goisvintha had entered the temple.  The street was
still desolate; no help was at hand.

Not advancing at once, she concealed herself near the door behind a
projection in the pile of idols, watching from it until Ulpius, in the
progress of his frenzy, should turn away from Antonina, whom he stood
fronting at this instant.  But she had not entered unperceived;
Antonina had seen her again. And now the bitterness of death, when the
young die unprotected in their youth, came over the girl, and she cried
in a low wailing voice, as she knelt by Numerian's side:  'I must die,
father, I must die, as Hermanric died!  Look up at me, and speak to me
before I die!'

Her father was still praying; he heard nothing, for his heart was
bleeding in atonement at the shrine of his boyish home, and his soul
still communed with its Maker.  The voice that followed hers was the
voice of Ulpius.

'Oh, beautiful are the gardens round the sacred altars, and lofty the
trees that embower the glittering shrines!' he exclaimed, rapt and
ecstatic in his new visions.  'Lo, the morning breaks, and the spirits
of light are welcomed by a sacrifice!  The sun goes down behind the
mountain, and the beams of evening tremble on the victim beneath the
knife of the adoring priest!  The moon and stars shine high in the
firmament, and the Genii of Nights are saluted in the still hours with
blood!'

As he paused, the lament of Antonina was continued in lower and lower
tones:  'I must die, father, I must die!'  And with it murmured the
supplicating accents of Numerian:  'God of Mercy! deliver the helpless
and forgive the afflicted!  Lord of Judgment! deal gently with Thy
servants who have sinned!' While, mingling with both in discordant
combination, the strange music of the temple still poured on its
lulling sound--the rippling of the running waters and the airy chiming
of the bells!


'Worship!--emperors, armies, nations, glorify and worship me!' shouted
the madman, in thunder-tones of triumph and command, as his eye for the
first time encountered the figure of Numerian prostrate at his feet.
'Worship the demi-god who moves with the deities through spheres
unknown to man!  I have heard the moans of the unburied who wander on
the shores of the Lake of the Dead--worship!  I have looked on the
river whose black current roars and howls in its course through the
caves of everlasting night--worship!  I have seen the furies lashed by
serpents on their wrinkled necks, and followed them as they hurled
their torches over the pining ghosts!  I have stood unmoved in the
hurricane-tumult of hell--worship! worship! worship!'

He turned round again towards the altar of idols, calling upon his gods
to proclaim his deification, and at the moment when he moved,
Goisvintha sprang forward.  Antonina was kneeling with her face turned
from the door, as the assassin seized her by her long hair and drove
the knife into her neck. The moaning accents of the girl, bewailing her
approaching fate, closed in one faint groan; she stretched out her
arms, and fell forward over her father's body.

In the ferocious triumph of the moment, Goisvintha raised her arm to
repeat the stroke; but at that instant the madman looked round.  'The
sacrifice--the sacrifice!' he shouted, leaping at one spring like a
wild beast at her throat.  She struck ineffectually at him with the
knife, as he fastened his long nails in her flesh and hurled her
backwards to the floor.  Then he yelled and gibbered in frantic
exultation, set his foot on her breast, and spat on her as she lay
beneath him.

The contact of the girl's body when she fell--the short but terrible
tumult of the attack that passed almost over him--the shrill, deafening
cries of the madman, awoke Numerian from his trance of despairing
remembrance, aroused him in his agony of supplicating prayer.  He
looked up.

The scene that met his eyes was one of those scenes which crush every
faculty but the faculty of mechanical action--before which, thought
vanishes from men's minds, utterance is suspended on their lips,
expression is paralysed on their faces.  The coldness of the tomb
seemed breathed over Numerian's aspect by the contemplation of the
terrible catastrophe:  his eyes were glassy and vacant, his lips parted
and rigid; even the remembrance of the discovery of his brother seemed
lost to him as he stooped over his daughter and bound a fragment of her
robe round her neck.  The mute, soulless, ghastly stillness of death
looked settled on his features, as, unconscious now of weakness or age,
he rose with her in his arms, stood motionless for one moment before
the doorway, and looked slowly round on Ulpius; then he moved forward
with heavy regular steps.  The Pagan's foot was still on Goisvintha's
breast as the father passed him; his gaze was still fixed on her; but
his cries of triumph were calmed; he laughed and muttered incoherently
to himself.

The moon was rising, soft, faint, and tranquil, over the quiet street
as Numerian descended the temple steps with his daughter in his arms,
and, after an instant's pause of bewilderment and doubt, instinctively
pursued his slow, funereal course along the deserted roadway in the
direction of home. Soon, as he advanced, he beheld in the moonlight,
down the long vista of the street at its termination, a little
assemblage of people walking towards him with calm and regular
progress. As they came nearer, he saw that one of them held an open
book, that another carried a crucifix, and that others followed these
two with clasped hands and drooping heads.  And then, after an
interval, the fresh breezes that blew towards him bore onward these
words, slowly and reverently pronounced:--

'Know, therefore, that God exacteth of thee less than thine iniquity
deserveth.

'Canst thou, by searching, find out God?  Canst thou find out the
Almighty to perfection?'

Then the breeze fell, the words grew indistinct, but the procession
still moved forward.  As it came nearer and nearer, the voice of the
reader was again plainly heard:--

'If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness
dwell in thy tabernacles.

'For then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot; yea, thou shalt be
steadfast, and shalt not fear;

'Because thou shalt forget thy misery, and remember it as waters that
pass away:

And thine age shall be clearer than the noonday; thou shalt shine
forth, thou shalt be as the morning.'

The reader stopped and closed the book; for now Numerian had met the
members of the little procession, and they looked on him standing
voiceless before them in the clear moonlight, with his daughter's head
drooping over his shoulder as he carried her in his arms.

There were some among those who gathered round him whose features he
would have recognised at another time as the features of the surviving
adherents of his former congregation.  The assembly he had met was
composed of the few sincere Christians in Rome, who had collected, on
the promulgation of the news that Alaric had ratified terms of peace,
to make a pilgrimage through the city, in the hopeless endeavour, by
reading from the Bible and passing exhortation, to awaken the reckless
populace to a feeling of contrition for their sins, and of devout
gratitude for their approaching deliverance from the horrors of the
siege.

But now, when Numerian confronted them, neither by word nor look did he
express the slightest recognition of any who surrounded him.  To all
the questions addressed to him, he replied by hurried gestures that
none could comprehend.  To all the promises of help and protection
heaped upon him in the first outbreak of the grief and pity of his
adherents of other days, he answered but by the same dull, vacant
glance.  It was only when they relieved him of his burden, and gently
prepared to carry the senseless girl among them back to her father's
house, that he spoke; and then, in faint entreating tones, he besought
them to let him hold her hand as they went, so that he might be the
first to feel her pulse beat--if it yet moved.

They turned back by the way they had come--a sorrowful and slow-moving
procession!  As they passed on, the reader again opened the Sacred
Book; and then these words rose through the soothing and heavenly
tranquillity of the first hours of night:--

'Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth:  therefore despise not
thou the chastening of the Almighty:

'For he maketh sore, and bindeth up:  he woundeth, and his hands make
whole.'



CHAPTER 26.

RETRIBUTION.

As, in the progress of Life, each man pursues his course with the
passions, good and evil, set, as it were, on either side of him; and
viewing their results in the actions of his fellow-men, finds his
attention, while still attracted by the spectacle of what is noble and
virtuous, suddenly challenged by the opposite display of what is mean
and criminal--so, in the progress of this narrative, which aims to be
the reflection of Life, the reader who has journeyed with us thus far,
and who may now be inclined to follow the little procession of
Christian devotees, to walk by the side of the afflicted father, and to
hold with him the hand of his ill-fated child, is yet, in obedience to
the conditions of the story, required to turn back for awhile to the
contemplation of its darker passages of guilt and terror--he must enter
the temple again; but he will enter it for the last time.

The scene before the altar of idols was fast proceeding to its fatal
climax.


The Pagan's frenzy had exhausted itself in its own fury--his insanity
was assuming a quieter and a more dangerous form; his eye grew cunning
and suspicious; a stealthy deliberation and watchfulness appeared in
all his actions.  He now slowly lifted his foot from Goisvintha's
breast, and raised his hands at the same time to strike her back if she
should attempt to escape.  Seeing that she lay senseless from her fall,
he left her; retired to one of the corners of the temple, took from it
a rope that lay there, and returning, bound her arms behind her at the
hands and wrists.  The rope cut deep through the skin--the pain
restored her to her senses; she suffered the sharp agony in her own
body, in the same place where she had inflicted it on the young
chieftain at the farm-house beyond the suburbs.

The minute after, she felt herself dragged along the ground, farther
into the interior of the building. The madman drew her up to the iron
gates of the passage through the partition, and fastening the end of
the rope to them, left her there.  This part of the temple was
enveloped in total darkness--her assailant addressed not a word to
her--she could not obtain even a glimpse of his form, but she could
hear him still laughing to himself in hoarse, monotonous tones, that
sounded now near, and now distant again.

She abandoned herself as lost--prematurely devoted to the torment and
death that she had anticipated; but, as yet, her masculine resolution
and energy did not decline.  The very intensity of the anguish she
suffered from the bindings at her wrists, producing a fierce bodily
effort to resist it, strengthened her iron-strung nerves.  She neither
cried for help nor appealed to the Pagan for pity. The gloomy fatalism
which she had inherited from her savage ancestors sustained her in a
suicide-pride.

Ere long the laughter of Ulpius, while he moved slowly hither and
thither in the darkness of the temple, was overpowered by the sound of
her voice--deep, groaning, but yet steady--as she uttered her last
words--words poured forth like the wild dirges, the fierce death-songs
of the old Goths when they died deserted on the bloody battle-field, or
were cast bound into deep dungeons, a prey to the viper and the asp.
Thus she spoke:--  'I swore to be avenged! while I went forth from
Aquileia with the child that was killed and the child that was wounded;
while I climbed the high wall in the night-time, and heard the tumult
of the beating waves near the bank where I buried the dead; while I
wandered in the darkness over the naked heath and through the lonely
forest; while I climbed the pathless sides of the mountains, and made
my refuge in the cavern by the waters of the dark lake.

'I swore to be avenged! while the warriors approached me on their
march, and the roaring of the trumpets and the clash of the armour
sounded in my ears; while I greeted my kinsman, Hermanric, a mighty
chieftain, at the king's side, among the invading hosts; while I looked
on my last child, dead like the rest, and knew that he was buried afar
from the land of his people, and from the others that the Romans had
slain before him.

'I swore to be avenged! while the army encamped before Rome, and I
stood with Hermanric, looking on the great walls in the misty evening;
while the daughter of the Roman was a prisoner in our tent, and I eyed
her as she lay on my knees; while for her sake my kinsman turned
traitor, and withheld my hand from the blow; while I passed unseen into
the lonely farm-house to deal judgment on him with my knife; while I
saw him die the death of a deserter at my feet, and knew that it was a
Roman who had lured him from his people, and blinded him to the
righteousness of revenge.

'I swore to be avenged! while I walked round the grave of the chieftain
who was the last of my race; while I stood alone out of the army of my
people in the city of the slayers of my babes; while I  tracked the
footsteps of the Roman who had twice escaped me, as she fled through
the street; while I watched and was patient among the pillars of the
temple, and waited till the sun went down, and the victim was
unshielded for the moment to strike.


'I swore to be avenged! and my oath has been fulfilled--the knife that
still bleeds drops with her blood; the chief vengeance has been
wreaked! The rest that were to be slain remain for others, and not for
me!  For now I go to my husband and my children; now the hour is near
at hand when I shall herd with their spirits in the Twilight World of
Shadows, and make my long-abiding place with them in the Valley of
Eternal Repose!  The Destinies have willed it--it is enough!'

Her voice trembled and grew faint as she pronounced the last words.
The anguish of the fastenings at her wrists was at last overpowering
her senses--conquering, in spite of all resistance, her stubborn
endurance. For a little while yet she spoke at intervals, but her
speech was fragmentary and incoherent.  At one moment she still gloried
in her revenge, at another she exulted in the fancied contemplation of
the girl's body still lying before her, and her hands writhed beneath
their bonds in the effort to repossess themselves of the knife and
strike again.  But soon all sounds ceased to proceed from her lips,
save the loud, thick, irregular breathings, which showed that she was
yet conscious and yet lived.

Meanwhile the madman had passed into the inner recess of the temple,
and had drawn the shutter over the opening in the wall, through which
light had been admitted into the place when Numerian and Antonina first
entered it.  Even the black chasm formed by the mouth of the vault of
the dragon now disappeared, with all other objects, in the thick
darkness.  But no obscurity could confuse the senses of Ulpius in the
temple, whose every corner he visited in his restless wanderings by
night and by day alike.  Led as if by a mysterious penetration of
sight, he traced his way unerringly to the entrance of the vault, knelt
down before it, and placing his hands on the first of the steps by
which it was descended, listened, breathless and attentive, to the
sounds that rose from the abyss--listened, rapt and unmoving, a
formidable and unearthly figure--like a magician waiting for a voice
from the oracles of Hell--like a spirit of Night looking down into the
mid-caverns of the earth, and watching the mysteries of subterranean
creation, the giant pulses of Action and Heat, which are the
life-springs of the rolling world.

The fitful wind whistled up, wild and plaintive; the river chafed and
bubbled through the iron grating below; the loose scales of the dragon
clashed as the night breezes reached them:  and these sounds were still
to him as the language of his gods, which filled him with a fearful
rapture, and inspired him, in the terrible degradation of his being, as
with a new soul.  He listened and listened yet. Fragments of wild
fancies--the vain yearnings of the disinherited mind to recover its
divine birthright of boundless thought--now thrilled through him, and
held him still and speechless where he knelt.

But at length, through the gloomy silence of the recess, he heard the
voice of Goisvintha raised once more, and in hoarse, wild tones calling
aloud for light and help.  The agony of pain and suspense, the awful
sense of darkness and stillness, of solitary bondage and slow torment,
had at last effected that which no open peril, no common menace of
violent death could have produced.  She yielded to fear and
despair--sank prostrate under a paralysing, superstitious dread.  The
misery that she had inflicted on others recoiled in retribution on
herself, as she now shuddered under the consciousness of the first
emotions of helpless terror that she had ever felt.

Ulpius instantly rose from the vault, and advanced straight through the
darkness to the gates of the partition; but he passed his prisoner
without stopping for an instant, and hastening into the outer apartment
of the temple, began to grope over the floor for the knife which the
woman had dropped when he bound her.  He was laughing to himself once
more, for the evil spirit was prompting him to a new project, tempting
him to a pitiless refinement of cruelty and deceit.

He found the knife, and returning with it to Goisvintha, cut the rope
that confined her wrists.  Then she became silent when the first
sharpness of her suffering was assuaged; he whispered softly in her
ear, 'Follow me, and escape!'


Bewildered and daunted by the darkness and mystery around her, she
vainly strained her eyes to look through the obscurity as Ulpius drew
her on into the recess.  He placed her at the mouth of the vault, and
here she strove to speak; but low, inarticulate sounds alone proceeded
from her powerless utterance.  Still there was no light; still the
burning, gnawing agony at her wrists (relieved but for an instant when
the rope was cut) continued and increased; and still she felt the
presence of the unseen being at her side, whom no darkness could blind,
and who bound and loosed at his arbitrary will.

By nature fierce, resolute, and vindictive under injury, she was a
terrible evidence of the debasing power of crime, as she now stood,
enfeebled by the weight of her own avenging guilt, upraised to crush
her in the hour of her pride; by the agency of Darkness, whose perils
the innocent and the weak have been known to brave; by Suspense, whose
agony they have resisted; by Pain, whose infliction they have endured
in patience.

'Go down, far down the steep steps, and escape!' whispered the madman,
in soft, beguiling tones. 'The darkness above leads to the light below!
Go down, far down!'

He quitted his hold of her as he spoke.  She hesitated, shuddered, and
drew back; but again she was urged forward, and again she heard the
whisper, 'The darkness above leads to the light below!  Go down, far
down!'

Despair gave the firmness to proceed, and dread the hope to escape.
Her wounded arms trembled as she now stretched them out and felt for
the walls of the vault on either side of her.  The horror of death in
utter darkness, from unseen hands, and the last longing aspiration to
behold the light of heaven once more, were at their strongest within
her as she began slowly and cautiously to tread the fatal stairs.

While she descended, the Pagan dropped into his former attitude at the
month of the vault, and listened breathlessly.  Minutes seemed to
elapse between each step as she went lower and lower down.  Suddenly he
heard her pause, as if panic-stricken in the darkness, and her voice
ascended to him, groaning, 'Light! light! oh, where is the light!'  He
rose up, and stretched out his hands to hurl her back if she should
attempt to return; but she descended again.  Twice he heard her heavy
footfall on the steps--then there was an interval of deep silence--then
a sharp, grinding clash of metal echoed piercingly through the vault,
followed by the noise of a dull, heavy fall, faintly audible far
beneath--and then the old familiar sounds of the place were heard
again, and were not interrupted more.  The sacrifice to the Dragon was
achieved!

      *      *      *      *      *

The madman stood on the steps of the sacred building, and looked out on
the street shining before him in the bright Italian moonlight.  No
remembrance of Numerian and Antonina, and of the earlier events in the
temple, remained within him.  He was pondering imperfectly, in vague
pride and triumph, over the sacrifice that he had offered up at the
shrine of the Dragon of brass.  Thus secretly exulting, he now remained
inactive.  Absorbed in his wandering meditations, he delayed to trace
the subterranean passages leading to the iron grating where the corpse
of Goisvintha lay washed by the waters, as they struggled onward
through the bars, and waiting but his hand to be cast into the river,
where all past sacrifices had been engulphed before it.

His tall solitary figure was lit by the moonlight streaming through the
pillars of the portico; his loose robes waved slowly about him in the
wind, as he stood firm and erect before the door of the temple: he
looked more like the spectral genius of departed Paganism than a living
man.  But, lifeless though he seemed, his quick eye was still on the
watch, still directed by the restless suspicion of insanity. Minute
after minute quietly elapsed, and as yet nothing was presented to his
rapid observation but the desolate roadway, and the high, gloomy houses
that bounded it on either side.  It was soon, however, destined to be
attracted by objects which startled the repose of the tranquil street
with the tumult of action and life.


He was still gazing earnestly on the narrow view before him, vaguely
imagining to himself, the while, Goisvintha's fatal descent into the
vault, and thinking triumphantly of her dead body that now lay on the
grating beneath it, when a red glare of torchlight, thrown wildly on
the moon-brightened pavement, whose purity it seemed to stain, caught
his eye.

The light appeared at the end of the street leading from the more
central portion of the city, and ere long displayed clearly a body of
forty or fifty people advancing towards the temple.  The Pagan looked
eagerly on them as they came nearer and nearer.  The assembly was
composed of priests, soldiers, and citizens--the priests bearing
torches, the soldiers carrying hammers, crowbars, and other similar
tools, or bending under the weight of large chests secured with iron
fastenings, close to which the populace walked, as if guarding them
with jealous care.  This strange procession was preceded by two men,
who were considerably in advance of it--a priest and soldier.  An
expression of impatience and exultation appeared on their pale,
famine-wasted countenances, as they approached the temple with rapid
steps.

Ulpius never moved from his position, but fixed his piercing eyes on
them as they advanced.  Not vainly did he now stand, watchful and
menacing, before the entrance of his gloomy shrine.  He had seen the
first degradations heaped on fallen Paganism, and he was now to see the
last.  He had immolated all his affections and all his hopes, all his
faculties of body and mind, his happiness in boyhood, his enthusiasm in
youth, his courage in manhood, his reason in old age, at the altar of
his gods; and now they were to exact from him, in their defence, lonely
criminal, maddened, as he already was in their cause, more than all
this!  The decree had gone forth from the Senate which devoted to
legalised pillage the treasures in the temples of Rome.

Rulers of a people impoverished by former exactions, and comptrollers
only of an exhausted treasury, the government of the city had searched
vainly among all ordinary resources for the means of paying the heavy
ransom exacted by Alaric as the price of peace.  The one chance of
meeting the emergency that remained was to strip the Pagan temples of
the mass of jewelled ornaments and utensils, the costly robes, the
idols of gold and silver which they were known to contain, and which,
under that mysterious hereditary influence of superstition, whose power
it is the longest labour of truth to destroy, had remained untouched
and respected, alike by the people and the senate, after the worship
that they represented had been interdicted by the laws, and abandoned
by the nation.

This last expedient for freeing Rome from the blockade was adopted
almost as soon as imagined.  The impatience of the starved populace for
the immediate collection of the ransom allowed the government little
time for the tedious preliminaries of deliberation.  The soldiers were
provided at once with the necessary implements for the task imposed on
them; certain chosen members of the senate and the people followed
them, to see that they honestly gathered in the public spoil; and the
priests of the Christian churches volunteered to hallow the expedition
by their presence, and led the way with their torches into every secret
apartment of the temples where treasure might be contained. At the
close of the day, immediately after it had been authorised, this
strange search for the ransom was hurriedly commenced.  Already much
had been collected; votive offerings of price had been snatched from
the altars, where they had so long hung undisturbed; hidden
treasure-chests of sacred utensils had been discovered and broken open;
idols had been stripped of their precious ornaments and torn from their
massive pedestals; and now the procession of gold-seekers, proceeding
along the banks of the Tiber, had come in sight of the little temple of
Serapis, and were hastening forward to empty it, in its turn, of every
valuable that it contained.

The priest and the soldier, calling to their companions behind to hurry
on, had now arrived opposite the temple steps, and saw confronting them
in the pale moonlight, from the eminence on which he stood, the weird
and solitary figure of Ulpius--the apparition of a Pagan in the
gorgeous robes of his priesthood, bidden back from the tombs to stay
the hand of the spoiler before the shrine of his gods.

The soldier dropped his weapon to the ground, and, trembling in every
limb, refused to proceed. But the priest, a tall, stern, emaciated man,
went on defenceless and undaunted.  He signed himself solemnly with the
cross as he slowly ascended the steps; fixed his unflinching eyes on
the madman, who glared back on him in return; and called aloud in a
harsh, steady voice:  'Man or demon! in the name of Christ, whom thou
deniest, stand back!'

For an instant, as the priest approached him, the Pagan averted his
eyes and looked on the concourse of people and the armed soldiers
rapidly advancing.  His fingers closed round the hilt of Goisvintha's
knife, which he had hitherto held loosely in his hand, as he exclaimed
in low, concentrated tones, 'Aha! the siege--the siege of Serapis!'
The priest, now standing on the same step with him, stretched out his
arm to thrust him back, and at that moment received the stroke of the
knife.  He staggered, lifted his hand again to sign his forehead with
the cross, and, as he raised it, rolled back dead on the pavement of
the street.

The soldier, standing motionless with superstitious terror a few feet
from the corpse, called to his companions for help.  Hurling his bloody
weapon at them in defiance, as they ran in confusion to the base of the
temple steps, Ulpius entered the building, and locked and chained the
gates.

Then the assembled people thronging round the corpse of the priest,
heard the madman shouting in his frenzy, as if to a great body of
adherents round him, to pour down the molten lead and the scorching
sand; to hurl back every scaling ladder planted against the walls; to
massacre each prisoner who was seized mounting the ramparts to the
assault; and as they looked up to the building from the street, they
saw at intervals, through the bars of the closed gates, the figure of
Ulpius passing swift and shadowy, his arms extended, his long grey hair
and white robes streaming behind him, as he rushed round and round the
temple reiterating his wild Pagan war-cries as he went.  The enfeebled,
superstitious populace trembled while they gazed--a spectre driven on a
whirlwind would not have been more terrible to their eyes.

But the priest among the crowd, roused to fury by the murder of one of
their own body, revived the courage of those around them.  Even the
shouts of Ulpius were now overpowered by the sound of their voices,
raised to the highest pitch, promising heavenly and earthly
rewards--salvation, money, absolution, promotion--to all who would
follow them up the steps and burst their way into the temple.  Animated
by the words of the priests, and growing gradually confident in their
own numbers, the boldest in the throng seized a piece of timber lying
by the river side, and using it as a battering-ram, assailed the gate.
But they were weakened with famine; they could gain little impetus,
from the necessity of ascending the temple steps to the attack; the
iron quivered as they struck it, but hinge and lock remained firm
alike.  They were preparing to renew the attempt, when a tremendous
shock--a crash as if the whole heavy roof of the building had fallen
in--drove them back in terror to the street.

Recalled by the sight of the armed men, the priests and the attendant
crowd of people who were advancing to invade his sanctuary, to the days
when he had defended the great Temple of Serapis at Alexandria, against
enemies similar in appearance, though far superior in numbers;
persuaded in the revival of these, the most sanguinary visions of his
insanity, that he was still resisting the Christian fanatics, supported
by his adherents in his sacred fortress of former years, the Pagan
displayed none of his accustomed cunning and care in moving through the
darkness around him.  He hurried hither and thither, encouraging his
imaginary followers, and glorying in his dreams of slaughter and
success, forgetful in his frenzy of all that the temple contained.


As he pursued his wild course round and round the altar of idols, his
robe became entangled, and was torn by the projecting substances at one
corner of it.  The whole overhanging mass tottered at the moment, but
did not yet fall.  A few of the smaller idols, however, at the outside
dropped to the ground, and with them an image of Serapis, which they
happened partially to support--a heavy monstrous figure, carved
life-size in wood, and studded with gold, silver, and precious
stones--fell at the Pagan's feet.  But this was all--the outer
materials of the perilous structure had been detached only at one
point; the pile itself still remained in its place.

The madman seized the image of Serapis in his arms, and passed blindly
onward with it through the passage in the partition into the recess
beyond.  At that instant the shock of the first attack on the gates
resounded through the building.  Shouting, as he heard it, 'A sally! a
sally! men of the Temple, the gods and the high priest lead you on!'
and still holding the idol before him, he rushed straight forward to
the entrance, and struck in violent collision against the backward part
of the pile.

The ill-balanced, top-heavy mass of images and furniture of many
temples swayed, parted, and fell over against the gates and the wall on
either side of them.  Maimed and bleeding, struck down by the lower
part of the pile, as it was forced back against the partition when the
upper part fell, the fury of Ulpius was but increased by the crashing
ruin around him.  He struggled up again into an erect position; mounted
on the top of the fallen mass--now spread out at the sides over the
floor of the building, but confined at one end by the partition, and at
the other by the opposite wall and the gates--and still clasping the
image of Serapis in his arms, called louder and louder to 'the men of
the Temple' to mount with him the highest ramparts and pour down on the
besiegers the molten lead!

The priests were again the first men to approach the gates of the
building after the shock that had been heard within it.  The struggle
for the possession of the temple had assumed to them the character of a
holy warfare against heathenism and magic--a sacred conflict to be
sustained by the Church, for the sake of her servant who had fallen a
martyr at the outset of the strife.  Strong in their fanatical
boldness, they advanced with one accord close to the gates.  Some of
the smaller images of the fallen pile had been forced through the bars,
behind which appeared the great idols, the broken masses of furniture,
the long robes and costly hangings, all locked together in every wild
variety of position--a chaos of distorted objects heaped up by an
earthquake! Above and further inward, the lower part of the Pagan's
robe was faintly discernible through the upper interstices in the gate,
as he stood, commanding, on the summit of his prostrate altar, with his
idol in his arms.

The priests felt an instant conviction of certain triumph when they
discerned the cause of the shock that had been heard within the temple.
One of their number snatched up a small image that had fallen through
to the pavement where he stood, and holding it before the people below,
exclaimed exultingly--

'Children of the Church! the mystery is revealed!  Idols more precious
than this lie by hundreds on the floor of the temple!  It is no demon,
but a man, one man, who still defies us within!--a robber who would
defraud the Romans of the ransom of their lives!--the pillage of many
temples is around him.  Remember now, that the nearer we came to this
place the fewer were the spoils of idolatry that we gathered in; the
treasure which is yours, the treasure which is to free you from the
famine, has been seized by the assassin of our holy brother; it is
there scattered at his feet!  To the gates!  To the gates again!
Absolution for all their sins to the men who burst in the gates!'

Again the mass of timber was taken up; again the gates were assailed;
and again they stood firm--they were now strengthened, barricaded by
the fallen pile.  It seemed hopeless to attempt to break them down
without a reinforcement of men, without employing against them the
heaviest missiles, the strongest engines of war.


The people gave vent to a cry of fury as they heard from the temple the
hollow laughter of the madman triumphing in their defeat.  The words of
the priest, in allaying their superstitious fears, had aroused the
deadly passions that superstition brings forth.  A few among the throng
hurried to the nearest guard-house for assistance, but the greater part
pressed closely round the temple--some pouring forth impotent
execrations against the robber of the public spoil, some joining the
priests in calling on him to yield.  But the clamour lasted not long;
it was suddenly and strangely stilled by the voice of one man in the
crowd, calling loudly to the rest to fire the temple!

The words were hardly spoken ere they were repeated triumphantly on all
sides.  'Fire the temple!' cried the people ferociously.  'Burn it over
the robber's head!  A furnace--a furnace! to melt down the gold and
silver ready to our hands!  Fire the temple!  Fire the temple!'

Those who were most active among the crowd (which was now greatly
increased by stragglers from all parts of the city) entered the houses
behind them, and returned in a few minutes with every inflammable
substance that they could collect in their hands.  A heap of fuel, two
or three feet in height, was raised against the gates immediately, and
soldiers and people pressed forward with torches to light it.  But the
priest who had before spoken waved them back.  'Wait!' he cried; 'the
fate of his body is with the people, but the fate of his soul is with
the Church!'

Then, turning to the temple, he called solemnly and sternly to the
madman, 'Thy hour is come!  repent, confess, and save thy soul!'

'Slay on! slay on!' answered the raving voice from within.  'Slay, till
not a Christian is left!  Victory! Serapis!  See, they drop from our
walls!--they writhe bleeding on the earth beneath us!  There is no
worship but the worship of the gods!  Slay!  Slay on!'

'Light!' cried the priest.  'His damnation be on his own head!
Anathema!  Maranatha!  Let him die accursed!'

The dry fuel was fired at once at all points--it was an anticipation of
an 'Auto da Fe', a burning of a heretic, in the fifth century!  As the
flames rose, the people fell back and watched their rapid progress.
The priests, standing before them in a line, stretched out their hands
in denunciation against the temple, and repeated together the awful
excommunication service of the Roman Church.

      *      *      *      *      *

The fire at the gates had communicated with the idols inside.  It was
no longer on his prostrate altar, but on his funeral pile that Ulpius
now stood; and the image that he clasped was the stake to which he was
bound.  A red glare, dull at first, was now brightening and brightening
below him; flames, quick and noiseless, rose and fell, and rose again,
at different points, illuminating the interior of the temple with
fitful and changing light.  The grim, swarthy forms of the idols seemed
to sway and writhe like living things in torment, as fire and smoke
alternately displayed and concealed them.  A deadly stillness now
overspread the face and form of the Pagan, as he looked down
steadfastly on the deities of his worship engendering his destruction
beneath him.  His cheek--the cheek which had rested in boyhood on his
mother's bosom--was pressed against the gilded breast of the god
Serapis, his taskmaster in life--his pillow in death!

'I rise!  I rise to the world of light, with my deities whom I have
served!' he murmured; 'the brightness of their presence is like a
flaming fire; the smoke of their breath pours forth around me like the
smoke of incense!  I minister in the Temples of the Clouds; and the
glory of eternal sunlight shines round me while I adore!  I rise!  I
rise!'

The smoke whirled in black volumes over his head; the fierce voice of
the fast-spreading fire roared on him; the flames leapt up at his
feet--his robes kindled, burst into radiant light, as the pile yawned
and opened under him.

      *      *      *      *      *


Time had passed.  The strife between the Temple and the Church was
ended.  The priests and the people had formed a wider circle round the
devoted building; all that was inflammable in it had been burnt; smoke
and flame now burst only at intervals through the gates, and gradually
both ceased to appear.  Then the crowd approached nearer to the temple,
and felt the heat of the furnace they had kindled, as they looked in.

The iron gates were red hot--from the great mass behind (still glowing
bright in some places, and heaving and quivering with its own heat) a
thin, transparent vapour rose slowly to the stone roof of the building,
now blackened with smoke.  The priests looked eagerly for the corpse of
the Pagan;  they saw two dark, charred objects closely united together,
lying in a chasm of ashes near the gate, at a spot where the fire had
already exhausted itself, but it was impossible to discern which was
the man and which was the idol.

The necessity of providing means for entering the temple had not been
forgotten while the flames were raging.  Proper implements for forcing
open the gates were now at hand, and already the mob began to dip their
buckets in the Tiber, and pour water wherever any traces of the fire
remained. Soon all obstacles were removed; the soldiers crowded into
the building with spades in their hands, trampled on the black, watery
mire of cinders which covered what had once been the altar of idols,
and throwing out into the street the refuse ashes and the stone images
which had remained unconsumed, dug in what was left, as in a new mine,
for the gold and silver which the fire could not destroy.

The Pagan had lived with his idols, had perished with his idols!--and
now where they were cast away, there he was cast away with them.  The
soldiers, as they dug into fragments the black ruins of his altar,
mingled him in fragments with it!  The people, as they cast the refuse
thrown out to them into the river, cast what remained of him with what
remained of his gods!  And when the temple was deserted, when the
citizens had borne off all the treasure they could collect, when
nothing but a few heaps of dust was left of all that had been burnt,
the night-wind blew away before it the ashes of Ulpius with the ashes
of the deities that Ulpius had served!



CHAPTER 27.

THE VIGIL OF HOPE.

A new prospect now opens before us.  The rough paths through which we
have hitherto threaded our way grow smoother as we approach their
close. Rome, so long dark and gloomy to our view, brightens at length
like a landscape when the rain is past and the first rays of returning
sunlight stream through the parting clouds.  Some days have elapsed,
and in those days the temples have yielded all their wealth; the
conquered Romans have bribed the triumphant barbarians to mercy; the
ransom of the fallen city has been paid.

The Gothic army is still encamped round the walls, but the gates are
opened, markets for food are established in the suburbs, boats appear
on the river and waggons on the highroads, laden with provisions, and
proceeding towards Rome.  All the hidden treasure kept back by the
citizens is now bartered for food; the merchants who hold the market
reap a rich harvest of spoil, but the hungry are filled, the weak are
revived, every one is content.

It is the end of the second day since the free sale of provisions and
the liberty of egress from the city have been permitted by the Goths.
The gates are closed for the night, and the people are quietly
returning, laden with their supplies of food, to their homes.  Their
eyes no longer encounter the terrible traces of the march of pestilence
and famine through every street; the corpses have been removed, and the
sick are watched and sheltered.  Rome is cleansed from her pollutions,
and the virtues of household life begin to revive wherever they once
existed.  Death has thinned every family, but the survivors again
assemble together in the social hall.  Even the veriest criminals, the
lowest outcasts of the population, are united harmlessly for a while in
the general participation of the first benefits of peace.


To follow the citizens to their homes; to trace in their thoughts,
words, and action the effect on them of their deliverance from the
horrors of the blockade; to contemplate in the people of a whole city,
now recovering as it were from a deep swoon, the varying forms of the
first reviving symptoms in all classes, in good and bad, rich and
poor--would afford matter enough in itself for a romance of searching
human interest, for a drama of the passions, moving absorbingly through
strange, intricate, and contrasted scenes.  But another employment than
this now claims our care.  It is to an individual, and not to a divided
source of interest, that our attention turns; we relinquish all
observations on the general mass of the populace to revert to Numerian
and Antonina alone--to penetrate once more into the little dwelling on
the Pincian Hill.

The apartment where the father and daughter had suffered the pangs of
famine together during the period of the blockade, presented an
appearance far different from that which it had displayed on the
occasion when they had last occupied it.  The formerly bare walls were
now covered with rich, thick hangings; and the simple couch and scanty
table of other days had been exchanged for whatever was most luxurious
and complete in the household furniture of the age.  At one end of the
room three women, attended by a little girl, were engaged in preparing
some dishes of fruit and vegetables; at the other, two men were
occupied in low, earnest conversation, occasionally looking round
anxiously to a couch placed against the third side of the apartment, on
which Antonina lay extended, while Numerian watched by her in silence.
The point of Goisvintha's knife had struck deep, but, as yet, the fatal
purpose of the assassination had failed.

The girl's eyes were closed; her lips were parted in the languor of
suffering; one of her hands lay listless on her father's knee.  A
slight expression of pain, melancholy in its very slightness, appeared
on her pale face, and occasionally a long-drawn, quivering breath
escaped her--nature's last touching utterance of its own feebleness!
The old man, as he sat by her side, fixed on her a wistful, inquiring
glance.  Sometimes he raised his hand, and gently and mechanically
moved to and fro the long locks of her hair, as they spread over the
head of the couch; but he never turned to communicate with the other
persons in the room--he sat as if he saw nothing save his daughter's
figure stretched before him, and heard nothing save the faint,
fluttering sound of her breathing, close at his ear.

It was now dark, and one lamp hanging from the ceiling threw a soft
equal light over the room.  The different persons occupying it
presented but little evidence of health and strength in their
countenances, to contrast them in appearance with the wounded girl; all
had undergone the wasting visitation of the famine, and all were pale
and languid, like her.  A strange, indescribable harmony prevailed over
the scene.  Even the calmness of absorbing expectation and trembling
hope, expressed in the demeanour of Numerian, seemed reflected in the
actions of those around him, in the quietness with which the women
pursued their employment, in the lower and lower whispers in which the
men continued their conversation.  There was something pervading the
air of the whole apartment that conveyed a sense of the solemn,
unworldly stillness which we attach to the abstract idea of religion.

Of the two men cautiously talking together, one was the patrician,
Vetranio; the other, a celebrated physician of Rome.

Both the countenance and manner of the senator gave melancholy proof
that the orgie at his palace had altered him for the rest of his life.
He looked what he was, a man changed for ever in constitution and
character.  A fixed expression of anxiety and gloom appeared in his
eyes; his emaciated face was occasionally distorted by a nervous,
involuntary contraction of the muscles; it was evident that the
paralysing effect of the debauch which had destroyed his companions
would remain with him to the end of his existence.  No remnant of his
careless self-possession, his easy, patrician affability, appeared in
his manner, as he now listened to his companion's conversation; years
seemed to have been added to his life since he had headed the table at
'The Banquet of Famine'.


'Yes,' said the physician, a cold, calm man, who spoke much, but
pronounced all his words with emphatic deliberation,--'Yes, as I have
already told you, the wound in itself was not mortal.  If the blade of
the knife had entered near the centre of the neck, she must have died
when she was struck. But it passed outwards and backwards; the large
vessels escaped, and no vital part has been touched.'

'And yet you persist in declaring that you doubt her recovery!'
exclaimed Vetranio, in low, mournful tones.

'I do,' pursued the physician.  'She must have been exhausted in mind
and body when she received the blow--I have watched her carefully; I
know it!  There is nothing of the natural health and strength of youth
to oppose the effects of the wound.  I have seen the old die from
injuries that the young recover, because life in them was losing its
powers of resistance; she is in the position of the old!'

'They have died before me, and she will die before me!  I shall lose
all--all!' sighed Vetranio bitterly to himself.

'The resources of our art are exhausted,' continued the other; 'nothing
remains but to watch carefully and wait patiently.  The chances of life
or death will be decided in a few hours; they are equally balanced now.'

'I shall lose all!--all!' repeated the senator mournfully, as if he
heeded not the last words.

'If she dies,' said the physician, speaking in warmer tones, for he was
struck with pity, in spite of himself, at the spectacle of Vetranio's
utter dejection, 'if she dies, you can at least remember that all that
could be done to secure her life has been done by you.  Her father,
helpless in his lethargy and his age, was fitted only to sit and watch
her, as he has sat and watched her day after day; but you have spared
nothing, forgotten nothing.  Whatever I have asked for, that you have
provided; the hangings round the room, and the couch that she lies on,
are yours; the first fresh supplies of nourishment from the
newly-opened markets were brought here from you; I told you that she
was thinking incessantly of what she had suffered, that it was
necessary to preserve her against her own recollections, that the
presence of women about her might do good, that a child appearing
sometimes in the room might soothe her fancy, might make her look at
what was passing, instead of thinking of what had passed--you found
them, and sent them!  I have seen parents less anxious for their
children, lovers for their mistresses, than you for this girl.'

'My destiny is with her,' interrupted Vetranio, looking round
superstitiously to the frail form on the couch.  'I know nothing of the
mysteries that the Christians call their "Faith", but I believe now in
the soul; I believe that one soul contains the fate of another, and
that her soul contains the fate of mine!'

The physician shook his head derisively.  His calling had determined
his philosophy--he was as ardent a materialist as Epicurus himself.

'Listen,' said Vetranio; 'since I first saw her, a change came over my
whole being; it was as if her life was mingled with mine!  I had no
influence over her, save an influence for ill:  I loved her, and she
was driven defenceless from her home!  I sent my slaves to search Rome
night and day; I exerted all my power, I lavished my wealth to discover
her; and, for the first time in this one effort, I failed in what I had
undertaken.  I felt that through me she was lost--dead!  Days passed
on; life weighed weary on me; the famine came.  You know in what way I
determined that my career should close; the rumour of the Banquet of
Famine reached you as it reached others!'

'It did,' replied the physician.  'And I see before me in your face,'
he added, after a momentary pause, 'the havoc which that ill-omened
banquet has worked.  My friend, be advised!--abandon for ever the
turmoil of your Roman palace, and breathe in tranquillity the air of a
country home.  The strength you once had is gone never to return--if
you would yet live, husband what is still left.'


'Hear me,' pursued Vetranio, in low, gloomy tones.  'I stood alone in
my doomed palace; the friends whom I had tempted to their destruction
lay lifeless around me; the torch was in my hand that was to light our
funeral pile, to set us free from the loathsome world!  I approached
triumphantly to kindle the annihilating flames, when she stood before
me--she, whom I had sought as lost and mourned as dead!  A strong hand
seemed to wrench the torch from me; it dropped to the ground!  She
departed again; but I was powerless to take it up; her look was still
before me; her face, her figure, she herself, appeared ever watching
between the torch and me!'

'Lower!--speak lower!' interrupted the physician, looking on the
senator's agitated features with unconcealed astonishment and pity.
'You retard your own recovery,--you disturb the girl's repose by
discourse such as this.'

'The officers of the senate,' continued Vetranio, sadly resuming his
gentler tones, 'when they entered the palace, found me still standing
on the place where we had met!  Days passed on again; I stood looking
out upon the street, and thought of my companions whom I had lured to
their death, and of my oath to partake their fate, which I had never
fulfilled.  I would have driven my dagger to my heart; but her face was
yet before me, my hands were bound!  In that hour I saw her for the
second time; saw her carried past me--wounded, assassinated!  She had
saved me once; she had saved me twice! I knew that now the chance was
offered me, after having wrought her ill, to work her good; after
failing to discover her when she was lost, to succeed in saving her
when she was dying; after having survived the deaths of my friends at
my own table, to survive to see life restored under my influence, as
well as destroyed!  These were my thoughts; these are my thoughts
still--thoughts felt only since I saw her!  Do you know now why I
believe that her soul contains the fate of mine?  Do you see me,
weakened, shattered, old before my time; my friends lost, my fresh
feelings of youth gone for ever; and can you not now comprehend that
her life is my life?--that if she dies, the one good purpose of my
existence is blighted?--that I lose all I have henceforth to live
for?--all, all!'

As he pronounced the concluding words, the girl's eyes half unclosed,
and turned languidly towards her father.  She made an effort to lift
her hand caressingly from his knee to his neck; but her strength was
unequal even to this slight action.  The hand was raised only a few
inches ere it sank back again to its old position; a tear rolled slowly
over her cheek as she closed her eyes again, but she never spoke.

'See,' said the physician, pointing to her, 'the current of life is at
its lowest ebb!  If it flows again, it must flow to-night.'

Vetranio made no answer; he dropped down on the seat near him, and
covered his face with his robe.

The physician, beholding the senator's situation, and reflecting on the
strange hurriedly-uttered confession which had just been addressed to
him, began to doubt whether the scenes through which his patron had
lately passed had not affected his brain.  Philosopher though he was,
the man of science had never observed the outward symptoms of the first
working of good and pure influences in elevating a degraded mind; he
had never watched the denoting signs of speech and action which mark
the progress of mental revolution while the old nature is changing for
the new; such objects of contemplation existed not for him.  He gently
touched Vetranio on the shoulder. 'Rise,' said he, 'and let us depart.
Those are around her who can watch her best.  Nothing remains for us
but to wait and hope.  With the earliest morning we will return.'

He delivered a few farewell directions to one of the women in
attendance, and then, accompanied by the senator, who, without speaking
again, mechanically rose to follow him, quitted the room.  After this,
the silence was only interrupted by the sound of an occasional whisper,
and of quick, light footsteps passing backwards and forwards.  Then the
cooling, reviving draughts which had been prepared for the night were
poured ready into the cups; and the women approached Numerian, as if to
address him, but he waved his hand impatiently when he saw them; and
then they too, in their turn, departed, to wait in an adjoining
apartment until they should be summoned again.


Nothing changed in the manner of the father when he was left alone in
the chamber of sickness, which the lapse of a few hours might convert
into the chamber of death.  He sat watching Antonina, and touching the
outspread locks of her hair from time to time, as had been his wont.
It was a fair, starry night; the fresh air of the soft winter climate
of the South blew gently over the earth, the great city was sinking
fast into tranquillity, calling voices were sometimes heard faintly
from the principal streets, and the distant noises of martial music
sounded cheerily from the Gothic camp as the sentinels were posted
along the line of watch; but soon these noises ceased, and the
stillness of Rome was as the stillness round the couch of the wounded
girl.

Day after day, and night after night, since the assassination in the
temple, Numerian had kept the same place by his daughter's side.  Each
hour as it passed found him still absorbed in his long vigil of hope;
his life seemed suspended in its onward course by the one influence
that now enthralled it.  At the brief intervals when his bodily
weariness overpowered him on his melancholy watch, it was observed by
those around him that, even in his short dreaming clumbers, his face
remained ever turned in the same direction, towards the head of the
couch, as if drawn thither by some irresistible attraction, by some
powerful ascendancy, felt even amid the deepest repose of sensation,
the heaviest fatigue of the overlaboured mind, and worn, sinking heart.
He held no communication, save by signs, with the friends about him; he
seemed neither to hope, to doubt, nor to despair with them; all his
faculties were strung up to vibrate at one point only, and were dull
and unimpressible in every other direction.

But twice had he been heard to speak more than the fewest, simplest
words.  The first time, when Antonina uttered the name of Goisvintha,
on the recovery of her senses after her wound, he answered eagerly by
reiterated declarations that there was nothing henceforth to fear; for
he had seen the assassin dead under the Pagan's foot on leaving the
temple.  The second time, when mention was incautiously made before him
of rumours circulated through Rome of the burning of an unknown Pagan
priest, hidden in the temple of Serapis, with vast treasures around
him, the old man was seen to start and shudder, and heard to pray for
the soul that was now waiting before the dread judgment-seat; to murmur
about a vain restoration and a discovery made too late; to mourn over
horror that thickened round him, over hope fruitlessly awakened, and
bereavement more terrible than mortal had ever suffered before; to
entreat that the child, the last left of all, might be spared--with
many words more, which ran on themes like these, and which were counted
by all who listened to them but as the wanderings of a mind whose
higher powers were fatally prostrated by feebleness and grief.

One long hour of the night had already passed away since parent and
child had been left together, and neither word nor movement had been
audible in the melancholy room.  But, as the second hour began, the
girl's eyes unclosed again, and she moved painfully on the couch.
Accustomed to interpret the significance of her slightest actions,
Numerian rose and brought her one of the reviving draughts that had
been left ready for use.  After she had drunk, when her eyes met her
father's fixed on her in mute and mournful inquiry, her lips closed,
and formed themselves into an expression which he remembered they had
always assumed when, as a little child, she used silently to hold up
her face to him to be kissed.  The miserable contrast between what she
was now and what she had been them, was beyond the passive endurance,
the patient resignation of the spirit-broken old man; the empty cup
dropped from his hands, he knelt down by the side of the couch and
groaned aloud.

'O father! father!' cried the weak, plaintive voice above him.  'I am
dying!  Let us remember that our time to be together here grows shorter
and shorter, and let us pass it as happily as we can!'

He raised his head, and looked up at her, vacant and wistful, forlorn
already, as if the death-parting was over.


'I have tried to live humbly and gratefully,' she sighed faintly.  'I
have longed to do more good on the earth than I have done!  Yet you
will forgive me now, father, as you have always forgiven me!  You have
been patient with me all my life; more patient than I have ever
deserved! But I had no mother to teach me to love you as I ought, to
teach me what I know now, when my death is near, and time and
opportunity are mine no longer!'

'Hush! hush!' whispered the old man affrightedly; 'you will live!  God
is good, and knows that we have suffered enough.  The curse of the last
separation is not pronounced against us!  Live, live!'

'Father,' said the girl tenderly, 'we have that within us which not
death itself can separate.  In another world I shall still think of you
when you think of me!  I shall see you even when I am no more here,
when you long to see me!  When you go out alone, and sit under the
trees on the garden bank where I used to sit; when you look forth on
the far plains and mountains that I used to look on;  when you read at
night in the Bible that we have read in together, and remember Antonina
as you lie down sorrowful to rest; then I shall see you! then you will
feel that I am looking on you!  You will be calm and consoled, even by
the side of my grave; for you will think, not of the body that is
beneath, but of the spirit that is waiting for you, as I have often
waited for you here when you were away, and I knew that the approach of
the evening would bring you home again!'

'Hush! you will live!--you will live!' repeated Numerian in the same
low, vacant tones.  The strength that still upheld him was in those few
simple words; they were the food of a hope that was born in agony and
cradled in despair.

'Oh, if I might live!' said the girl softly, 'if I might live but for a
few days yet, how much I have to live for!'  She endeavoured to bend
her head towards her father as she spoke; for the words were beginning
to fall faintly and more faintly from her lips--exhaustion was
mastering her once again.  She dwelt for a moment now on the name of
Hermanric, on the grave in the farm-house garden; then reverted again
to her father. The last feeble sounds she uttered were addressed to
him; and their burden was still of consolation and of love.

Soon the old man, as he stooped over her, saw her eyes close
again--those innocent, gentle eyes which even yet preserved their old
expression while the face grew wan and pale around them--and darkness
and night sank down over his soul while he looked.  'She sleeps,' he
murmured in a voice of awe, as he resumed his watching position by the
side of the couch.  'They call death a sleep; but on her face there is
no death!'

The night grew on.  The women who were in attendance entered the room
about midnight, wondering that their assistance had not yet been
required.  They beheld the solemn, unruffled composure on the girl's
wasted face; the rapt attention of Numerian, as he ever preserved the
same attitude by her side; and went out again softly without uttering a
word, even in a whisper.  There was something dread and impressive in
the very appearance of this room, where Death, that destroys, was in
mortal conflict with Youth and Beauty, that adorn, while the eyes of
one old man watched in loneliness the awful progress of the strife.

Morning came, and still there was no change.  Once, when the lamp that
lit the room was fading out as the dawn appeared, Numerian had risen
and looked close on his daughter's face--he thought at that moment that
her features moved; but he saw that the flickering of the dying light
on them had deceived him; the same stillness was over her.  He placed
his ear close to her lips for an instant, and then resumed his place,
not stirring from it again.  The slow current of his blood seemed to
have come to a pause--he was waiting as a man waits with his head on
the block ere the axe descends--as a mother waits to hear that the
breath of life has entered her new-born child.


The sun rose bright in a cloudless sky.  As the fresh, sharp air of the
early dawn warmed under its spreading rays, the women entered the
apartment again, and partly drew aside the curtain and shutter from the
window.  The beams of the new light fell fair and glorifying on the
girl's face; the faint, calm breezed ruffled the lighter locks of her
hair.  Once this would have awakened her; but it did not disturb her
now.

Soon after the voice of the child who sojourned with the women in the
house was heard beneath, in the hall, through the half-opened door of
the room.  The little creature was slowly ascending the stairs, singing
her faltering morning song to herself.  She was preceded on her
approach by a tame dove, bought at the provision market outside the
walls, but preserved for the child as a pet and plaything by its
mother.  The bird fluttered, cooing, into the room, perched upon the
head of the couch, and began dressing its feathers there.  The women
had caught the infection of the old man's enthralling suspense; and
moved not to bid the child retire, or to take away the dove from its
place--they watched like him.  But the soft, lulling notes of the bird
were powerless over the girl's ear, as the light sunbeam over her
face--still she never woke.

The child entered, and pausing in her song, climbed on to the side of
the couch.  She held out one little hand for the dove to perch upon,
placed the other lightly on Antonina's shoulder, and pressed her fresh,
rosy lips to girl's faded cheek.  'I and my bird have come to make
Antonina well this morning,' she said gravely.

The still, heavily-closed eyelids moved!--they quivered, opened,
closed, then opened again.  The eyes had a faint, dreaming, unconscious
look; but Antonina lived!  Antonina was awakened at last to another day
on earth!

Her father's rigid, straining gaze still remained fixed upon her as at
first, but on his countenance there was a blank, an absence of all
appearance of sensation and life.  The women, as they looked on
Antonina and looked on him, began to weep; the child resumed very
softly its morning song, now addressing it to the wounded girl and now
to the dove.

At this moment Vetranio and the physician appeared on the scene.  The
latter advanced to the couch, removed the child from it, and examined
Antonina intently.  At length, partly addressing Numerian, partly
speaking to himself, he said:  'She has slept long, deeply, without
moving, almost without breathing--a sleep like death to all who looked
on it.'

The old man spoke not in reply, but the women answered eagerly in the
affirmative.

'She is saved,' pursued the physician, leisurely quitting the side of
the couch and smiling on Vetranio; 'be careful of her for days and days
to come.'

'Saved! saved!' echoed the child joyfully, setting the dove free in the
room, and running to Numerian to climb on his knees.  The father
glanced down when the clear young voice sounded in his ear.  The
springs of joy, so long dried up in his heart, welled forth again as he
saw the little hands raised towards him entreatingly; his grey head
drooped--he wept.

At a sign from the physician the child was led from the room.  The
silence of deep and solemn emotion was preserved by all who remained;
nothing was heard but the suppressed sobs of the old man, and the
faint, retiring notes of the infant voice still singing its morning
song.  And now one word, joyfully reiterated again and again, made all
the burden of the music--

'SAVED!  SAVED!'


THE CONCLUSION.  'UBI THESAURUS IBI COR.'


Shortly after the opening of the provision markets outside the gates of
Rome, the Goths broke up their camp before the city and retired to
winter quarters in Tuscany.  The negotiations which ensued between
Alaric and the Court and Government at Ravenna, were conducted with
cunning moderation by the conqueror, and with infatuated audacity by
the conquered, and ultimately terminated in a resumption of
hostilities. Rome was besieged a second and a third time by 'the
barbarians'.  On the latter occasion the city was sacked, its palaces
were burnt, its treasures were seized; the monuments of the Christian
religion were alone respected.

But it is no longer with the Goths that our narrative is concerned; the
connection with them which it has hitherto maintained closes with the
end of the first siege of Rome.  We can claim the reader's attention
for historical events no more--the march of our little pageant, arrayed
for his pleasure, is over.  If, however, he has felt, and still
retains, some interest in Antonina, he will not refuse to follow us,
and look on her again ere we part.

More than a month had passed since the besieging army had retired to
their winter quarters, when several of the citizens of Rome assembled
themselves on the plains beyond the walls, to enjoy one of those rustic
festivals of ancient times, which are still celebrated, under different
usages, but with the same spirit, by the Italians of modern days.

The place was a level plot of ground beyond the Pincian Gate, backed by
a thick grove of pine trees, and looking towards the north over the
smooth extent of the country round Rome.  The persons congregated were
mostly of the lower class.  Their amusements were dancing, music, games
of strength and games of chance; and, above all, to people who had
lately suffered the extremities of famine, abundant eating and
drinking--long, serious, ecstatic enjoyment of the powers of
mastication and the faculties of taste.

Among the assembly were some individuals whose dress and manner raised
them, outwardly at least, above the general mass.  These persons walked
backwards and forwards together on different parts of the ground as
observers, not as partakers in the sports.  One of their number,
however, in whatever direction he turned, preserved an isolated
position.  He held an open letter in his hand, which he looked at from
time to time, and appeared to be wholly absorbed in his own thoughts.
This man we may advantageously particularise on his own account, as
well as on account of the peculiarity of his accidental situation; for
he was the favoured minister of Vetranio's former pleasures--'the
industrious Carrio'.

The freedman (who was last introduced to the reader in Chapter XIV., as
exhibiting to Vetranio the store of offal which he had collected during
the famine for the consumption of the palace) had contrived of late
greatly to increase his master's confidence in him.  On the
organisation of the Banquet of Famine, he had discreetly refrained from
testifying the smallest desire to save himself from the catastrophe in
which the senator and his friends had determined to involve themselves.
Securing himself in a place of safety, he awaited the end of the orgie;
and when he found that its unexpected termination left his master still
living to employ him, appeared again as a faithful servant, ready to
resume his customary occupation with undiminished zeal.

After the dispersion of his household during the famine, and amid the
general confusion of the social system in Rome, on the raising of the
blockade, Vetranio found no one near him that he could trust but
Carrio--and he trusted him.  Nor was the confidence misplaced:  the man
was selfish and sordid enough; but these very qualities ensured his
fidelity to his master as long as that master retained the power to
punish and the capacity to reward.


The letter which Carrio held in his hand was addressed to him at a
villa--from which he had just returned--belonging to Vetranio, on the
shores of the Bay of Naples, and was written by the senator from Rome.
The introductory portions of this communication seemed to interest the
freedman but little:  they contained praises of his diligence in
preparing the country-house for the immediate habitation of its owner,
and expressed his master's anxiety to quit Rome as speedily as
possible, for the sake of living in perfect tranquillity, and breathing
the reviving air of the sea, as the physicians had counselled.  It was
the latter part of the letter that Carrio perused and re-perused, and
then meditated over with unwonted attention and labour of mind.  It ran
thus:--

'I have now to repose in you a trust, which you will execute with
perfect fidelity as you value my favour or respect the wealth from
which you may obtain your reward.  When you left Rome you left the
daughter of Numerian lying in danger of death:  she has since revived.
Questions that I have addressed to her during her recovery have
informed me of much in her history that I knew not before; and have
induced me to purchase, for reasons of my own, a farm-house and its
lands, beyond the suburbs.  (The extent of the place and its situation
are written on the vellum that is within this.) The husbandman who
cultivated the property had survived the famine, and will continue to
cultivate it for me.  But it is my desire that the garden, and all that
it contains, shall remain entirely at the disposal of Numerian and his
daughter, who may often repair to it; and who must henceforth be
regarded there as occupying my place and having my authority.  You will
divide your time between overlooking the few slaves whom I leave at the
palace in my absence, and the husbandman and his labourers whom I have
installed at the farm; and you will answer to me for the due
performance of your own duties and the duties of those under you--being
assured that by well filling this office you will serve your own
interests in these, and in all things besides.'

The letter concluded by directing the freedman to return to Rome on a
certain day, and to go to the farm-house at an appointed hour, there to
meet his master, who had further directions to give him, and who would
visit the newly acquired property before he proceeded on his journey to
Naples.

Nothing could exceed the perplexity of Carrio as he read the passage in
his patron's letter which we have quoted above.  Remembering the
incidents attending Vetranio's early connection with Antonina and her
father, the mere circumstances of a farm having been purchased to
flatter what was doubtless some accidental caprice on the part of the
girl, would have little perplexed him.  But that this act should be
followed by the senator's immediate separation of himself from the
society of Numerian's daughter; that she was to gain nothing after all
from these lands which had evidently been bought at her instigation,
but the authority over a little strip of garden; and yet, the
inviolability of this valueless privilege should be insisted on in such
serious terms, and with such an imperative tone of command as the
senator had never been known to use before--these were inconsistencies
which all Carrio's ingenuity failed to reconcile.  The man had been
born and reared in vice; vice had fed him, clothed him, freed him,
given him character, reputation, power in his own small way--he lived
in it as in the atmosphere that he breathed; to show him an action,
referable only to a principle of pure integrity, was to set him a
problem which it was hopeless to solve.  And yet it is impossible, in
one point of view, to pronounce him utterly worthless.  Ignorant of all
distinctions between good and bad, he thought wrong from sheer
inability to see right.

However his instructions might perplex him, he followed them now--and
continued in after days to follow them--to the letter.  If to serve
one's own interests be an art, of that art Carrio deserved to be head
professor.  He arrived at the farm-house, not only punctually, but
before the appointed time, and calling the honest husbandman and the
labourers about him, explained to them every particular of the
authority that his patron had vested in him, with a flowing and
peremptory solemnity of speech which equally puzzled and impressed his
simple audience.  He found Numerian and Antonina in the garden when he
entered it.  The girl had been carried there daily in a litter since
her recovery, and her father had followed.  They were never separated
now; the old man, when his first absorbing anxiety for her was calmed,
remembered again more distinctly the terrible disclosure in the temple,
and the yet more terrible catastrophe that followed it, and he sought
constant refuge from the horror of the recollection in the presence of
his child.


The freedman, during his interview with the father and daughter,
observed, for once, an involuntary and unfeigned respect; but he spoke
briefly, and left them together again almost immediately.  Humble and
helpless as they were, they awed him; they looked, thought, and spoke
like beings of another nature than his; they were connected, he knew
not how, with the mystery of the grave in the garden.  He would have
been self-possessed in the presence of the Emperor himself, but he was
uneasy in theirs.  So he retired to the more congenial scene of the
public festival which was in the immediate neighbourhood of the
farm-house, to await the hour of his patron's arrival, and to perplex
himself afresh by a re-perusal of Vetranio's letter.

The time was now near at hand when it was necessary for the freedman to
return to his appointed post.  He carefully rolled up his note of
instructions, stood for a few minutes vacantly regarding the amusements
which had hitherto engaged so little of his attention, and then,
turning, he proceeded through the pine-grove on his way back.  We will
follow him.

On leaving the grove, a footpath conducted over some fields to the
farm-house.  Arrived here, Carrio hesitated for a moment; then moved
slowly onward to await his master's approach in the lane that led to
the highroad.  At this point we will part company with him, to enter
the garden by the wicket-gate.

The trees, the flower-beds, and the patches of grass, all remained in
their former positions--nothing had been added or taken away since the
melancholy days that were past; but a change was visible in Hermanric's
grave.  The turf above it had been renewed, and a border of small
evergreen shrubs was planted over the track which Goisvintha's
footsteps had traced.  A white marble cross was raised at one end of
the mound; the short Latin inscription on it signified--'PRAY FOR THE
DEAD'.

The sunlight was shining calmly over the grave, and over Numerian and
Antonina as they sat by it. Sometimes when the mirth grew louder at the
rustic festival, it reached them in faint, subdued notes; sometimes
they heard the voices of the labourers in the neighbouring fields
talking to each other at their work; but, besides these, no other
sounds were loud enough to be distinguished.  There was still an
expression of the melancholy and feebleness that grief and suffering
leave behind them on the countenances of the father and daughter; but
resignation and peace appeared there as well--resignation that was
perfected by the hard teaching of woe, and peace that was purer for
being imparted from the one to the other, like the strong and deathless
love from which it grew.

There was something now in the look and attitude of the girl, as she
sat thinking of the young warrior who had died in her defence and for
her love, and training the shrubs to grow closer round the grave,
which, changed though she was, recalled in a different form the old
poetry and tranquillity of her existence when we first saw her singing
to the music of her lute in the garden on the Pincian Hill. No thoughts
of horror and despair were suggested to her as she now looked on the
farm-house scene. Hers was not the grief which shrinks selfishly from
all that revives the remembrance of the dead:  to her, their influence
over the memory was a grateful and a guardian influence that gave a
better purpose to the holiest life, and a nobler nature to the purest
thoughts.

Thus they were sitting by the grave, sad yet content; footsore already
on the pilgrimage of life, yet patient to journey farther if they
might--when an unusual tumult, a noise of rolling wheels, mingled with
a confused sound of voices, was heard in the lane behind them.  They
looked round, and saw that Vetranio was approaching them alone through
the wicket-gate.

He came forward slowly; the stealthy poison instilled by the Banquet of
Famine palpably displayed its presence within him as the clear sunlight
fell on his pale, wasted face.  He smiled kindly as he addressed
Antonina; but the bodily pain and mental agitation which that smile was
intended to conceal, betrayed themselves in his troubled voice as he
spoke.


'This is our last meeting for years--it may be our last meeting for
life,' he said; 'I linger at the outset of my journey, but to behold
you as guardian of the one spot of ground that is most precious to you
on earth--as mistress, indeed, of the little that I give you here!'  He
paused a moment and pointed to the grave, then continued:  'All the
atonement that I owe to you, you can never know--I can never
tell!--think only that I bear away with me a companion in the solitude
to which I go in the remembrance of you.  Be calm, good, happy still,
for my sake, and while you forgive the senator of former days, forget
not the friend who now parts from you in some sickness and sorrow, but
also in much patience and hope!  Farewell!'

His hand trembled as he held it out; a flush overspread the girl's
cheek while she murmured a few inarticulate words of gratitude, and,
bending over it, pressed it to her lips.  Vetranio's heart beat quick;
the action revived an emotion that he dared not cherish; but he looked
at the wan, downcast face before him, at the grave that rose mournful
by his side, and quelled it again.  Yet an instant he lingered to
exchange a farewell with the old man, then turned quickly, passed
through the gate, and they saw him no more.

Antonina's tears fell fast on the grass beneath as she resumed her
place.  When she raised her head again, and saw that her father was
looking at her, she nestled close to him and laid one of her arms round
his neck:  the other gradually dropped to her side, until her hand
reached the topmost leaves of the shrubs that grew round the grave.

      *      *      *      *      *

Shall we longer delay in the farm-house garden?  No!  For us, as for
Vetranio, it is now time to depart! While peace still watches round the
walls of Rome; while the hearts of the father and daughter still repose
together in security, after the trials that have wrung them, let us
quit the scene!  Here, at last, the narrative that we have followed
over a dark and stormy track reposes on a tranquil field; and here let
us cease to pursue it!

So the traveller who traces the course of a river wanders through the
day among the rocks and precipices that lead onward from its troubled
source; and, when the evening is at hand, pauses and rests where the
banks are grassy and the stream is smooth.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Antonina, by Wilkie Collins

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANTONINA ***

***** This file should be named 3606.txt or 3606.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/0/3606/

Produced by Bronwyn Margaret Evans.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hypatia, by Charles Kingsley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Hypatia
       or, New Foes with an Old Face

Author: Charles Kingsley

Release Date: August, 2004 [EBook #6308]
Posting Date: April 8, 2009
Last Updated: November 8, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HYPATIA ***




Produced by P. J. Riddick









HYPATIA

or

NEW FOES WITH AN OLD FACE


By Charles Kingsley





PREFACE


A picture of life in the fifth century must needs contain much which
will be painful to any reader, and which the young and innocent will
do well to leave altogether unread. It has to represent a very hideous,
though a very great, age; one of those critical and cardinal eras in
the history of the human race, in which virtues and vices manifest
themselves side by side--even, at times, in the same person--with the
most startling openness and power. One who writes of such an era labours
under a troublesome disadvantage. He dare not tell how evil people were;
he will not be believed if he tells how good they were. In the present
case that disadvantage is doubled; for while the sins of the Church,
however heinous, were still such as admit of being expressed in words,
the sins of the heathen world, against which she fought, were utterly
indescribable; and the Christian apologist is thus compelled, for the
sake of decency, to state the Church’s case far more weakly than the
facts deserve.

Not, be it ever remembered, that the slightest suspicion of immorality
attaches either to the heroine of this book, or to the leading
philosophers of her school, for several centuries. Howsoever base and
profligate their disciples, or the Manichees, may have been, the great
Neo-Platonists were, as Manes himself was, persons of the most rigid and
ascetic virtue.

For a time had arrived, in which no teacher who did not put forth the
most lofty pretensions to righteousness could expect a hearing. That
Divine Word, who is ‘The Light who lighteth every man which cometh into
the world,’ had awakened in the heart of mankind a moral craving never
before felt in any strength, except by a few isolated philosophers or
prophets. The Spirit had been poured out on all flesh; and from one end
of the Empire to the other, from the slave in the mill to the emperor
on his throne, all hearts were either hungering and thirsting after
righteousness, or learning to do homage to those who did so. And He who
excited the craving, was also furnishing that which would satisfy
it; and was teaching mankind, by a long and painful education, to
distinguish the truth from its innumerable counterfeits, and to find,
for the first time in the world’s life, a good news not merely for the
select few, but for all mankind without respect of rank or race.

For somewhat more than four hundred years, the Roman Empire and the
Christian Church, born into the world almost at the same moment, had
been developing themselves side by side as two great rival powers, in
deadly struggle for the possession of the human race. The weapons of
the Empire had been not merely an overwhelming physical force, and a
ruthless lust of aggressive conquest: but, even more powerful still, an
unequalled genius for organisation, and an uniform system of external
law and order. This was generally a real boon to conquered nations,
because it substituted a fixed and regular spoliation for the fortuitous
and arbitrary miseries of savage warfare: but it arrayed, meanwhile,
on the side of the Empire the wealthier citizens of every province, by
allowing them their share in the plunder of the labouring masses below
them. These, in the country districts, were utterly enslaved; while
in the cities, nominal freedom was of little use to masses kept from
starvation by the alms of the government, and drugged into brutish good
humour by a vast system of public spectacles, in which the realms of
nature and of art were ransacked to glut the wonder, lust, and ferocity
of a degraded populace.

Against this vast organisation the Church had been fighting for now four
hundred years, armed only with its own mighty and all-embracing message,
and with the manifestation of a spirit of purity and virtue, of love
and self-sacrifice, which had proved itself mightier to melt and weld
together the hearts of men, than all the force and terror, all the
mechanical organisation, all the sensual baits with which the Empire
had been contending against that Gospel in which it had recognised
instinctively and at first sight, its internecine foe.

And now the Church had conquered. The weak things of this world
had confounded the strong. In spite of the devilish cruelties of
persecutors; in spite of the contaminating atmosphere of sin which
surrounded her; in spite of having to form herself, not out of a race
of pure and separate creatures, but by a most literal ‘new birth’ out
of those very fallen masses who insulted and persecuted her; in spite of
having to endure within herself continual outbursts of the evil passions
in which her members had once indulged without cheek; in spite of
a thousand counterfeits which sprang up around her and within her,
claiming to be parts of her, and alluring men to themselves by that very
exclusiveness and party arrogance which disproved their claim; in spite
of all, she had conquered. The very emperors had arrayed themselves
on her side. Julian’s last attempt to restore paganism by imperial
influence had only proved that the old faith had lost all hold upon the
hearts of the masses; at his death the great tide-wave of new opinion
rolled on unchecked, and the rulers of earth were fain to swim with the
stream; to accept, in words at least, the Church’s laws as theirs; to
acknowledge a King of kings to whom even they owed homage and obedience;
and to call their own slaves their ‘poorer brethren,’ and often, too,
their ‘spiritual superiors.’

But if the emperors had become Christian, the Empire had not. Here and
there an abuse was lopped off; or an edict was passed for the visitation
of prisons and for the welfare of prisoners; or a Theodosius was
recalled to justice and humanity for a while by the stern rebukes of
an Ambrose. But the Empire was still the same: still a great tyranny,
enslaving the masses, crushing national life, fattening itself and its
officials on a system of world-wide robbery; and while it was paramount,
there could be no hope for the human race. Nay, there were even those
among the Christians who saw, like Dante afterwards, in the ‘fatal gift
of Constantine,’ and the truce between the Church and the Empire, fresh
and more deadly danger. Was not the Empire trying to extend over the
Church itself that upas shadow with which it had withered up every
other form of human existence; to make her, too, its stipendiary
slave-official, to be pampered when obedient, and scourged whenever she
dare assert a free will of her own, a law beyond that of her tyrants; to
throw on her, by a refined hypocrisy, the care and support of the masses
on whose lifeblood it was feeding? So thought many then, and, as I
believe, not unwisely.

But if the social condition of the civilised world was anomalous at the
beginning of the fifth century, its spiritual state was still more so.
The universal fusion of races, languages, and customs, which had gone
on for four centuries under the Roman rule, had produced a corresponding
fusion of creeds, an universal fermentation of human thought and faith.
All honest belief in the old local superstitions of paganism had
been long dying out before the more palpable and material idolatry of
Emperor-worship; and the gods of the nations, unable to deliver those
who had trusted in them, became one by one the vassals of the ‘Divus
Caesar,’ neglected by the philosophic rich, and only worshipped by
the lower classes, where the old rites still pandered to their grosser
appetites, or subserved the wealth and importance of some particular
locality.

In the meanwhile, the minds of men, cut adrift from their ancient
moorings, wandered wildly over pathless seas of speculative doubt, and
especially in the more metaphysical and contemplative East, attempted to
solve for themselves the questions of man’s relation to the unseen by
those thousand schisms, heresies, and theosophies (it is a disgrace to
the word philosophy to call them by it), on the records of which the
student now gazes bewildered, unable alike to count or to explain their
fantasies.

Yet even these, like every outburst of free human thought, had their use
and their fruit. They brought before the minds of churchmen a thousand
new questions which must be solved, unless the Church was to relinquish
for ever her claims as the great teacher and satisfier of the human
soul. To study these bubbles, as they formed and burst on every wave of
human life; to feel, too often by sad experience, as Augustine felt,
the charm of their allurements; to divide the truths at which they aimed
from the falsehood which they offered as its substitute; to exhibit the
Catholic Church as possessing, in the great facts which she proclaimed,
full satisfaction, even for the most subtle metaphysical cravings of a
diseased age;--that was the work of the time; and men were sent to do
it, and aided in their labour by the very causes which had produced the
intellectual revolution. The general intermixture of ideas, creeds,
and races, even the mere physical facilities for intercourse between
different parts of the Empire, helped to give the great Christian
fathers of the fourth and fifth centuries a breadth of observation,
a depth of thought, a large-hearted and large-minded patience and
tolerance, such as, we may say boldly, the Church has since beheld but
rarely, and the world never; at least, if we are to judge those great
men by what they had, and not by what they had not, and to believe, as
we are bound, that had they lived now, and not then, they would have
towered as far above the heads of this generation as they did above the
heads of their own. And thus an age, which, to the shallow insight of
a sneerer like Gibbon, seems only a rotting and aimless chaos of
sensuality and anarchy, fanaticism and hypocrisy, produced a Clement and
an Athanase, a Chrysostom and an Augustine; absorbed into the sphere of
Christianity all which was most valuable in the philosophies of Greece
and Egypt, and in the social organisation of Rome, as an heirloom for
nations yet unborn; and laid in foreign lands, by unconscious agents,
the foundations of all European thought and Ethics.

But the health of a Church depends, not merely on the creed which
it professes, not even on the wisdom and holiness of a few great
ecclesiastics, but on the faith and virtue of its individual members.
The _mens sana_ must have a _corpus sanum_ to inhabit. And even for the
Western Church, the lofty future which was in store for it would have
been impossible, without some infusion of new and healthier blood into
the veins of a world drained and tainted by the influence of Rome.

And the new blood, at the era of this story, was at hand. The great tide
of those Gothic nations, of which the Norwegian and the German are the
purest remaining types, though every nation of Europe, from Gibraltar to
St. Petersburg, owes to them the most precious elements of strength,
was sweeping onward, wave over wave, in a steady south-western current,
across the whole Roman territory, and only stopping and recoiling when
it reached the shores of the Mediterranean. Those wild tribes were
bringing with them into the magic circle of the Western Church’s
influence the very materials which she required for the building up of
a future Christendom, and which she could find as little in the Western
Empire as in the Eastern; comparative purity of morals; sacred respect
for woman, for family life, law, equal justice, individual freedom, and,
above all, for honesty in word and deed; bodies untainted by hereditary
effeminacy, hearts earnest though genial, and blessed with a strange
willingness to learn, even from those whom they despised; a brain equal
to that of the Roman in practical power, and not too far behind that of
the Eastern in imaginative and speculative acuteness.

And their strength was felt at once. Their vanguard, confined with
difficulty for three centuries beyond the Eastern Alps, at the expense
of sanguinary wars, had been adopted wherever it was practicable, into
the service of the Empire; and the heart’s core of the Roman legion
was composed of Gothic officers and soldiers. But now the main body had
arrived. Tribe after tribe was crowding down to the Alps, and trampling
upon each other on the frontiers of the Empire. The Huns, singly their
inferiors, pressed them from behind with the irresistible weight of
numbers; Italy, with her rich cities and fertile lowlands, beckoned them
on to plunder; as auxiliaries, they had learned their own strength and
Roman weakness; a _casus belli_ was soon found. How iniquitous was the
conduct of the sons of Theodosius, in refusing the usual bounty, by
which the Goths were bribed not to attack the Empire!--The whole pent-up
deluge burst over the plains of Italy, and the Western Empire became
from that day forth a dying idiot, while the new invaders divided Europe
among themselves. The fifteen years before the time of this tale had
decided the fate of Greece; the last four that of Rome itself. The
countless treasures which five centuries of rapine had accumulated
round the Capitol had become the prey of men clothed in sheepskins and
horse-hide; and the sister of an emperor had found her beauty, virtue,
and pride of race worthily matched by those of the hard-handed Northern
hero who led her away from Italy as his captive and his bride, to found
new kingdoms in South France and Spain, and to drive the newly-arrived
Vandals across the Straits of Gibraltar into the then blooming
coast-land of Northern Africa. Everywhere the mangled limbs of the Old
World were seething in the Medea’s caldron, to come forth whole, and
young, and strong. The Longbeards, noblest of their race, had found a
temporary resting-place upon the Austrian frontier, after long southward
wanderings from the Swedish mountains, soon to be dispossessed again by
the advancing Huns, and, crossing the Alps, to give their name for ever
to the plains of Lombardy. A few more tumultuous years, and the Franks
would find themselves lords of the Lower Rhineland; and before the hairs
of Hypatia’s scholars had grown gray, the mythic Hengist and Horsa would
have landed on the shores of Kent, and an English nation have begun its
world-wide life.

But some great Providence forbade to our race, triumphant in every other
quarter, a footing beyond the Mediterranean, or even in Constantinople,
which to this day preserves in Europe the faith and manners of Asia. The
Eastern World seemed barred, by some stern doom, from the only influence
which could have regenerated it. Every attempt of the Gothic races to
establish themselves beyond the sea, whether in the form of an organised
kingdom, as the Vandals attempted in Africa; or of a mere band of
brigands, as did the Goths in Asia Minor, under Gainas; or of a
praetorian guard, as did the Varangens of the middle age; or as
religious invaders, as did the Crusaders, ended only in the corruption
and disappearance of the colonists. That extraordinary reform in
morals, which, according to Salvian and his contemporaries, the Vandal
conquerors worked in North Africa, availed them nothing; they lost more
than they gave. Climate, bad example, and the luxury of power degraded
them in one century into a race of helpless and debauched slave-holders,
doomed to utter extermination before the semi-Gothic armies of
Belisarius; and with them vanished the last chance that the Gothic
races would exercise on the Eastern World the same stern yet wholesome
discipline under which the Western had been restored to life.

The Egyptian and Syrian Churches, therefore, were destined to labour not
for themselves, but for us. The signs of disease and decrepitude
were already but too manifest in them. That very peculiar turn of the
Graeco-Eastern mind, which made them the great thinkers of the then
world, had the effect of drawing them away from practice to speculation;
and the races of Egypt and Syria were effeminate, over-civilised,
exhausted by centuries during which no infusion of fresh blood had
come to renew the stock. Morbid, self-conscious, physically indolent,
incapable then, as now, of personal or political freedom, they afforded
material out of which fanatics might easily be made, but not citizens of
the kingdom of God. The very ideas of family and national life-those two
divine roots of the Church, severed from which she is certain to wither
away into that most godless and most cruel of spectres, a religious
world-had perished in the East from the evil influence of the universal
practice of slaveholding, as well as from the degradation of that Jewish
nation whichhad been for ages the great witness for those ideas; and
all classes, like their forefather Adam--like, indeed, ‘the old Adam’
in every man and in every age--were shifting the blame of sin from their
own consciences to human relationships and duties--and therein, to the
God who had appointed them; and saying as of old, ‘_The woman whom thou
gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat._’ The
passionate Eastern character, like all weak ones, found total abstinence
easier than temperance, religious thought more pleasant than godly
action; and a monastic world grew up all over the East, of such vastness
that in Egypt it was said to rival in numbers the lay population,
producing, with an enormous decrease in the actual amount of moral
evil, an equally great enervation and decrease of the population. Such
a people could offer no resistance to the steadily-increasing tyranny of
the Eastern Empire. In vain did such men as Chrysostom and Basil oppose
their personal influence to the hideous intrigues and villainies of the
Byzantine court; the ever-downward career of Eastern Christianity went
on unchecked for two more miserable centuries, side by side with the
upward development of the Western Church; and, while the successors
of the great Saint Gregory were converting and civilising a new-born
Europe, the Churches of the East were vanishing before Mohammedan
invaders, strong by living trust in that living God, whom the
Christians, while they hated and persecuted each other for arguments
about Him, were denying and blaspheming in every action of their lives.

But at the period whereof this story treats, the Graeco-Eastern mind
was still in the middle of its great work. That wonderful metaphysic
subtlety, which, in phrases and definitions too often unmeaning to
our grosser intellect, saw the symbols of the most important spiritual
realities, and felt that on the distinction between homoousios and
homoiousios might hang the solution of the whole problem of humanity,
was set to battle in Alexandria, the ancient stronghold of Greek
philosophy, with the effete remains of the very scientific thought to
which it owed its extraordinary culture. Monastic isolation from family
and national duties especially fitted the fathers of that period for the
task, by giving them leisure, if nothing else, to face questions with
a lifelong earnestness impossible to the more social and practical
Northern mind. Our duty is, instead of sneering at them as pedantic
dreamers, to thank Heaven that men were found, just at the time when
they were wanted, to do for us what we could never have done for
ourselves; to leave to us, as a precious heirloom, bought most truly
with the lifeblood of their race, a metaphysic at once Christian and
scientific, every attempt to improve on which has hitherto been found a
failure; and to battle victoriously with that strange brood of theoretic
monsters begotten by effete Greek philosophy upon Egyptian symbolism,
Chaldee astrology, Parsee dualism, Brahminic spiritualism-graceful and
gorgeous phantoms, whereof somewhat more will be said in the coming
chapters.

I have, in my sketch of Hypatia and her fate, closely followed authentic
history, especially Socrates’ account of the closing scene, as given
in Book vii. Para 15, of his _Ecclesiastical History_. I am inclined,
however, for various historical reasons, to date her death two years
earlier than he does. The tradition that she was the wife of Isidore,
the philosopher, I reject with Gibbon, as a palpable anachronism of at
least fifty years (Isidore’s master, Proclus, not having been born till
the year before Hypatia’s death), contradicted, moreover, by the very
author of it, Photius, who says distinctly, after comparing Hypatia and
Isidore, that Isidore married a certain ‘Domna.’ No hint, moreover, of
her having been married appears in any contemporary authors; and the
name of Isidore nowhere occurs among those of the many mutual friends
to whom Synesius sends messages in his letters to Hypatia, in which,
if anywhere, we should find mention of a husband, had one existed. To
Synesius’s most charming letters, as well as to those of Isidore, the
good Abbot of Pelusium, I beg leave to refer those readers who wish for
further information about the private life of the fifth century.

I cannot hope that these pages will be altogether free from anachronisms
and errors. I can only say that I have laboured honestly and
industriously to discover the truth, even in its minutest details,
and to sketch the age, its manners and its literature, as I found
them-altogether artificial, slipshod, effete, resembling far more the
times of Louis Quinze than those of Sophocles and Plato. And so I
send forth this little sketch, ready to give my hearty thanks to any
reviewer, who, by exposing my mistakes, shall teach me and the public
somewhat more about the last struggle between the Young Church and the
Old World.



CHAPTER I: THE LAURA


In the four hundred and thirteenth year of the Christian Era, some three
hundred miles above Alexandria, the young monk Philammon was sitting on
the edge of a low range of inland cliffs, crested with drifting sand.
Behind him the desert sand-waste stretched, lifeless, interminable,
reflecting its lurid glare on the horizon of the cloudless vault of
blue. At his feet the sand dripped and trickled, in yellow rivulets,
from crack to crack and ledge to ledge, or whirled past him in tiny jets
of yellow smoke, before the fitful summer airs. Here and there, upon the
face of the cliffs which walled in the opposite side of the narrow
glen below, were cavernous tombs, huge old quarries, with obelisks
and half-cut pillars, standing as the workmen had left them centuries
before; the sand was slipping down and piling up around them, their
heads were frosted with the arid snow; everywhere was silence,
desolation-the grave of a dead nation, in a dying land. And there he
sat musing above it all, full of life and youth and health and beauty--a
young Apollo of the desert. His only clothing was a ragged sheep-skin,
bound with a leathern girdle. His long black locks, unshorn from
childhood, waved and glistened in the sun; a rich dark down on cheek and
chin showed the spring of healthful manhood; his hard hands and sinewy
sunburnt limbs told of labour and endurance; his flashing eyes and
beetling brow, of daring, fancy, passion, thought, which had no sphere
of action in such a place. What did his glorious young humanity alone
among the tombs?

So perhaps he, too, thought, as he passed his hand across his brow, as
if to sweep away some gathering dream, and sighing, rose and wandered
along the cliffs, peering downward at every point and cranny, in search
of fuel for the monastery from whence he came.

Simple as was the material which he sought, consisting chiefly of the
low arid desert shrubs, with now and then a fragment of wood from some
deserted quarry or ruin, it was becoming scarcer and scarcer round Abbot
Pambo’s Laura at Scetis; and long before Philammon had collected his
daily quantity, he had strayed farther from his home than he had ever
been before.

Suddenly, at a turn of the glen, he came upon a sight new to him....a
temple carved in the sandstone cliff; and in front a smooth platform,
strewn with beams and mouldering tools, and here and there a skull
bleaching among the sand, perhaps of some workman slaughtered at his
labour in one of the thousand wars of old. The abbot, his spiritual
father--indeed, the only father whom he knew, for his earliest
recollections were of the Laura and the old man’s cell-had strictly
forbidden him to enter, even to approach any of those relics of ancient
idolatry: but a broad terrace-road led down to the platform from the
table-land above; the plentiful supply of fuel was too tempting to be
passed by.... He would go down, gather a few sticks, and then return, to
tell the abbot of the treasure which he had found, and consult him as to
the propriety of revisiting it.

So down he went, hardly daring to raise his eyes to the alluring
iniquities of the painted imagery which, gaudy in crimson and blue,
still blazed out upon the desolate solitude, uninjured by that rainless
air. But he was young, and youth is curious; and the devil, at least in
the fifth century, busy with young brains. Now Philammon believed most
utterly in the devil, and night and day devoutly prayed to be delivered
from him; so he crossed himself, and ejaculated, honestly enough,
‘Lord, turn away mine eyes, lest they behold vanity!’.... and looked
nevertheless....

And who could have helped looking at those four colossal kings, who sat
there grim and motionless, their huge hands laid upon their knees in
everlasting self-assured repose, seeming to bear up the mountain on
their stately heads? A sense of awe, weakness, all but fear, came over
him. He dare not stoop to take up the wood at his feet, their great
stern eyes watched him so steadily.

Round their knees and round their thrones were mystic characters
engraved, symbol after symbol, line below line--the ancient wisdom of
the Egyptians, wherein Moses the man of God was learned of old--why
should not he know it too? What awful secrets might not be hidden there
about the great world, past, present, and future, of which he knew only
so small a speck? Those kings who sat there, they had known it all;
their sharp lips seem parting, ready to speak to him.... Oh that they
would speak for once!.... and yet that grim sneering smile, that seemed
to look down on him from the heights of their power and wisdom, with
calm contempt.... him, the poor youth, picking up the leaving and rags
of their past majesty .... He dared look at them no more.

So he looked past them into the temple halls; into a lustrous abyss of
cool green shade, deepening on and inward, pillar after pillar, vista
after vista, into deepest night. And dimly through the gloom he could
descry, on every wall and column, gorgeous arabesques, long lines of
pictured story; triumphs and labours; rows of captives in foreign and
fantastic dresses, leading strange animals, bearing the tributes of
unknown lands; rows of ladies at feasts, their heads crowned with
garlands, the fragrant lotus-flower in every hand, while slaves brought
wine and perfumes, and children sat upon their knees, and husbands by
their side; and dancing girls, in transparent robes and golden girdles,
tossed their tawny limbs wildly among the throng.... What was the
meaning of it all? Why had it all been? Why had it gone on thus, the
great world, century after century, millennium after millennium, eating
and drinking, and marrying and giving in marriage, and knowing nothing
better.... how could they know anything better? Their forefathers had
lost the light ages and ages before they were born.... And Christ had
not come for ages and ages after they were dead.... How could they
know?.... And yet they were all in hell.... every one of them. Every one
of these ladies who sat there, with her bushy locks, and garlands, and
jewelled collars, and lotus-flowers, and gauzy dress, displaying all her
slender limbs-who, perhaps, when she was alive, smiled so sweetly, and
went so gaily, and had children, and friends, and never once thought of
what was going to happen to her--what must happen to her.... She was in
hell.... Burning for ever, and ever, and ever, there below his feet. He
stared down on the rocky floors. If he could but see through them....
and the eye of faith could see through them.... he should behold her
writhing and twisting among the flickering flame, scorched, glowing....
in everlasting agony, such as the thought of enduring for a moment made
him shudder. He had burnt his hands once, when a palm-leaf but caught
fire.... He recollected what that was like.... She was enduring ten
thousand times more than that for ever. He should hear her shrieking
in vain for a drop of water to cool her tongue.... He had never heard a
human being shriek but once.... a boy bathing on the opposite Nile bank,
whom a crocodile had dragged down.... and that scream, faint and distant
as it came across the mighty tide, had rung intolerable in his ears
for days.... and to think of all which echoed through those vaults of
fire-for ever! Was the thought bearable!--was it possible! Millions
upon millions burning forever for Adam’s fall .... Could God be just in
that?....

It was the temptation of a fiend! He had entered the unhallowed
precincts, where devils still lingered about their ancient shrines; he
had let his eyes devour the abominations of the heathen, and given place
to the devil. He would flee home to confess it all to his father. He
would punish him as he deserved, pray for him, forgive him. And yet
could he tell him all? Could he, dare he confess to him the whole
truth--the insatiable craving to know the mysteries of learning--to see
the great roaring world of men, which had been growing up in him slowly,
month after month, till now it had assumed this fearful shape? He
could stay no longer in the desert. This world which sent all souls to
hell--was it as bad as monks declared it was? It must be, else how could
such be the fruit of it? But it was too awful a thought to be taken on
trust. No; he must go and see.

Filled with such fearful questionings, half-inarticulate and vague, like
the thoughts of a child, the untutored youth went wandering on, till
he reached the edge of the cliff below which lay his home. It lay
pleasantly enough, that lonely Laura, or lane of rude Cyclopean cells,
under the perpetual shadow of the southern wall of crags, amid its grove
of ancient date-trees. A branching cavern in the cliff supplied the
purposes of a chapel, a storehouse, and a hospital; while on the sunny
slope across the glen lay the common gardens of the brotherhood, green
with millet, maize, and beans, among which a tiny streamlet, husbanded
and guided with the most thrifty care, wandered down from the cliff
foot, and spread perpetual verdure over the little plot which voluntary
and fraternal labour had painfully redeemed from the inroads of the
all-devouring sand. For that garden, like everything else in the Laura,
except each brother’s seven feet of stone sleeping-hut, was the common
property, and therefore the common care and joy of all. For the common
good, as well as for his own, each man had toiled up the glen with his
palm-leaf basket of black mud from the river Nile, over whose broad
sheet of silver the glen’s mouth yawned abrupt. For the common good,
each man had swept the ledges clear of sand, and sown in the scanty
artificial soil, the harvest of which all were to share alike. To
buy clothes, books, and chapel furniture for the common necessities,
education, and worship, each man sat, day after day, week after week,
his mind full of high and heavenly thoughts, weaving the leaves of their
little palm-copse into baskets, which an aged monk exchanged for goods
with the more prosperous and frequented monasteries of the opposite
bank. Thither Philammon rowed the old man over, week by week, in a light
canoe of papyrus, and fished, as he sat waiting for him, for the common
meal. A simple, happy, gentle life was that of the Laura, all portioned
out by rules and methods, which were held hardly less sacred than those
of the Scriptures, on which they were supposed (and not so wrongly
either) to have been framed. Each man had food and raiment, shelter on
earth, friends and counsellors, living trust in the continual care of
Almighty God; and, blazing before his eyes, by day and night, the hope
of everlasting glory beyond all poets’ dreams.... And what more would
man have had in those days? Thither they had fled out of cities,
compared with which Paris is earnest and Gomorrha chaste,--out of a
rotten, infernal, dying world of tyrants and slaves, hypocrites and
wantons,--to ponder undisturbed on duty and on judgment, on death and
eternity, heaven and hell; to find a common creed, a common interest,
a common hope, common duties, pleasures, and sorrows.... True, they had
many of them fled from the post where God had placed them, when they
fled from man into the Thebaid waste.... What sort of post and what
sort of an age they were, from which those old monks fled, we shall see,
perhaps, before this tale is told out.

‘Thou art late, son,’ said the abbot, steadfastly working away at his
palm-basket, as Philammon approached.

‘Fuel is scarce, and I was forced to go far.’

‘A monk should not answer till he is questioned. I did not ask the
reason. Where didst thou find that wood?’

‘Before the temple, far up the glen.’

‘The temple! What didst thou see there?’

No answer. Pambo looked up with his keen black eye.

‘Thou hast entered it, and lusted after its abominations.’

‘I--I did not enter; but I looked--’

‘And what didst thou see? Women?’

Philammon was silent.

‘Have I not bidden you never to look on the face of women? Are they not
the firstfruits of the devil, the authors of all evil, the subtlest of
all Satan’s snares? Are they not accursed for ever, for the deceit of
their first mother, by whom sin entered into the world? A woman first
opened the gates of hell; and, until this day, they are the portresses
thereof. Unhappy boy! What hast thou done?’

‘They were but painted on the walls.’

‘Ah!’ said the abbot, as if suddenly relieved from a heavy burden. ‘But
how knewest thou them to be women, when thou hast never yet, unless thou
liest--which I believe not of thee--seen the face of a daughter of Eve?’

‘Perhaps--perhaps,’ said Philammon, as if suddenly relieved by a new
suggestion--‘perhaps they were only devils. They must have been, I
think, for they were so very beautiful.’

‘Ah! how knowest thou that devils are beautiful?’

‘I was launching the boat, a week ago, with Father Aufugus; and on the
bank,....not very near,....there were two creatures....with long hair,
and striped all over the lower half of their bodies with black, and
red, and yellow....and they were gathering flowers on the shore. Father
Aufugus turned away; but I.... I could not help thinking them the most
beautiful things that I had ever seen....so I asked him why he turned
away; and he said that those were the same sort of devils which tempted
the blessed St. Anthony. Then I recollected having heard it read aloud,
how Satan tempted Anthony in the shape of a beautiful woman.... And
so.... and so.... those figures on the wall were very like.... and I
thought they might be....’

And the poor boy, who considered that he was making confession of a
deadly and shameful sin, blushed scarlet, and stammered, and at last
stopped.

‘And thou thoughtest them beautiful? Oh utter corruption of the
flesh!--oh subtilty of Satan! The Lord forgive thee, as I do, my poor
child; henceforth thou goest not beyond the garden walls.’

‘Not beyond the walls! Impossible! I cannot! If thou wert not my father,
I would say, I will not!--I must have liberty!--I must see for myself--I
must judge for myself, what this world is of which you all talk so
bitterly. I long for no pomps and vanities. I will promise you this
moment, if you will, never to re-enter a heathen temple--to hide my
face in the dust whenever I approach a woman. But I must--I must see
the world; I must see the great mother-church in Alexandria, and the
patriarch, and his clergy. If they can serve God in the city, why not
I? I could do more for God there than here .... Not that I despise this
work--not that I am ungrateful to you--oh, never, never that!--but I
pant for the battle. Let me go! I am not discontented with you, but with
myself. I know that obedience is noble; but danger is nobler still.
If you have seen the world, why should not I? If you have fled from it
because you found it too evil to live in, why should not I, and return
to you here of my own will, never to leave you? And yet Cyril and his
clergy have not fled from it....’

Desperately and breathlessly did Philammon drive this speech out of his
inmost heart; and then waited, expecting the good abbot to strike him
on the spot. If he had, the young man would have submitted patiently;
so would any man, however venerable, in that monastery. Why not? Duly,
after long companionship, thought, and prayer, they had elected Pambo
for their abbot--Abba--father--the wisest, eldest-hearted and headed of
them--if he was that, it was time that he should be obeyed. And obeyed
he was, with a loyal, reasonable love, and yet with an implicit,
soldier-like obedience, which many a king and conqueror might envy. Were
they cowards and slaves? The Roman legionaries should be good judges on
that point. They used to say that no armed barbarian, Goth or Vandal,
Moor or Spaniard, was so terrible as the unarmed monk of the Thebaid.

Twice the old man lifted his staff to strike; twice he laid it down
again; and then, slowly rising, left Philammon kneeling there, and moved
away deliberately, and with eyes fixed on the ground, to the house of
the brother Aufugus.

Every one in the Laura honoured Aufugus. There was a mystery about him
which heightened the charm of his surpassing sanctity, his childlike
sweetness and humility. It was whispered--when the monks seldom and
cautiously did whisper together in their lonely walks--that he had been
once a great man; that he had come from a great city--perhaps from Rome
itself. And the simple monks were proud to think that they had among
them a man who had seen Rome. At least, Abbot Pambo respected him. He
was never beaten; never even reproved--perhaps he never required it; but
still it was the meed of all; and was not the abbot a little partial?
Yet, certainly, when Theophilus sent up a messenger from Alexandria,
rousing every Laura with the news of the sack of Rome by Alaric, did
not Pambo take him first to the cell of Aufugus, and sit with him there
three whole hours in secret consultation, before he told the awful story
to the rest of the brotherhood? And did not Aufugus himself give letters
to the messenger, written with his own hand, containing, as was said,
deep secrets of worldly policy, known only to himself? So, when the
little lane of holy men, each peering stealthily over his plaiting
work from the doorway of his sandstone cell, saw the abbot, after his
unwonted passion, leave the culprit kneeling, and take his way toward
the sage’s dwelling, they judged that something strange and delicate had
befallen the common weal, and each wished, without envy, that he were as
wise as the man whose counsel was to solve the difficulty.

For an hour or more the abbot remained there, talking earnestly and
low; and then a solemn sound as of the two old men praying with sobs and
tears; and every brother bowed his head, and whispered a hope that He
whom they served might guide them for the good of the Laura, and of His
Church, and of the great heathen world beyond; and still Philammon knelt
motionless, awaiting his sentence; his heart filled-who can tell how?
‘The heart knoweth its own bitterness, and a stranger intermeddleth not
with its joy.’ So thought he as he knelt; and so think I, too, knowing
that in the pettiest character there are unfathomable depths, which the
poet, all-seeing though he may pretend to be, can never analyse, but
must only dimly guess at, and still more dimly sketch them by the
actions which they beget.

At last Pambo returned, deliberate, still, and slow, as he had gone, and
seating himself within his cell, spoke--

‘And the youngest said, Father, give me the portion of goods that
falleth to my share.... And he took his journey into a far country, and
there wasted his substance with riotous living. Thou shalt go, my son.
But first come after me, and speak with Aufugus.’

Philammon, like everyone else, loved Aufugus; and when the abbot
retired and left the two alone together, he felt no dread or shame about
unburdening his whole heart to him. Long and passionately he spoke, in
answer to the gentle questions of the old man, who, without the rigidity
or pedantic solemnity of the monk, interrupted the youth, and let
himself be interrupted in return, gracefully, genially, almost
playfully. And yet there was a melancholy about his tone as he answered
to the youth’s appeal--

‘Tertullian, Origen, Clement, Cyprian--all these moved in the world;
all these and many more beside, whose names we honour, whose prayers
we invoke, were learned in the wisdom of the heathen, and fought and
laboured, unspotted, in the world; and why not I? Cyril the patriarch
himself, was he not called from the caves of Nitria to sit on the throne
of Alexandria?’

Slowly the old man lifted his band, and putting back the thick locks of
the kneeling youth, gazed, with soft pitying eyes, long and earnestly
into his face.

‘And thou wouldst see the world, poor fool? And thou wouldst see the
world?’

‘I would convert the world!’

‘Thou must know it first. And shall I tell thee what that world is like,
which seems to thee so easy to convert? Here I sit, the poor unknown old
monk, until I die, fasting and praying, if perhaps God will have mercy
on my soul: but little thou knowest how I have seen it. Little thou
knowest, or thou wouldst be well content to rest here till the end. I
was Arsenius.... Ah! vain old man that I am! Thou hast never heard
that name, at which once queens would whisper and grow pale. Vanitas
vanitatum! omnia vanitas! And yet he, at whose frown half the world
trembles, has trembled himself at mine. I was the tutor of Arcadius.’

‘The Emperor of Byzantium?’

‘Even so, my son, even so. There I saw the world which thou wouldst see.
And what saw I? Even what thou wilt see. Eunuchs the tyrants of their
own sovereigns. Bishops kissing the feet of parricides and harlots.
Saints tearing saints in pieces for a word, while sinners cheer them on
to the unnatural fight. Liars thanked for lying, hypocrites taking pride
in their hypocrisy. The many sold and butchered for the malice, the
caprice, the vanity of the few. The plunderers of the poor plundered in
their turn by worse devourers than themselves. Every attempt at reform
the parent of worse scandals; every mercy begetting fresh cruelties;
every persecutor silenced, only to enable others to persecute him in
their turn: every devil who is exorcised, returning with seven others
worsethan himself; falsehood and selfishness, spite and lust, confusion
seven times confounded, Satan casting out Satan everywhere--from the
emperor who wantons on his throne, to the slave who blasphemes beneath
his fetters.’

‘If Satan cast out Satan, his kingdom shall not stand.’

‘In the world to come. But in this world it shall stand and conquer,
even worse and worse, until the end. These are the last days spoken of
by the prophets,--the beginning of woes such as never have been on
the earth before--“On earth distress of nations with perplexity, men’s
hearts failing them for fear, and for the dread of those things which
are coming on the earth.” I have seen it long. Year after year I have
watched them coming nearer and ever nearer in their course like the
whirling sand-storms of the desert, which sweep past the caravan, and
past again, and yet overwhelm it after all--that black flood of the
northern barbarians. I foretold it; I prayed against it; but, like
Cassandra’s of old, my prophecy and my prayers were alike unheard.
My pupil spurned my warnings. The lusts of youth, the intrigues of
courtiers, were stronger than the warning voice of God; then I ceased
to hope; I ceased to pray for the glorious city, for I knew that her
sentence was gone forth; I saw her in the spirit, even as St. John saw
her in the Revelations; her, and her sins, and her ruin. And I fled
secretly at night, and buried myself here in the desert, to await the
end of the world. Night and day I pray the Lord to accomplish His elect,
and to hasten His kingdom. Morning by morning I look up trembling, and
yet in hope, for the sign of the Son of man in heaven, when the sun
shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, and the stars
shall fall from heaven, and the skies pass away like a scroll, and the
fountains of the nether fire burst up around our feet, and the end of
all shall come. And thou wouldst go into the world from which I fled?’

‘If the harvest be at hand, the Lord needs labourers. If the times be
awful, I should be doing awful things in them. Send me, and let that
day find me, where I long to be, in the forefront of the battle of the
Lord.’

‘The Lord’s voice be obeyed! Thou shalt go. Here are letters to Cyril
the patriarch. He will love thee for my sake: and for thine own sake,
too, I trust. Thou goest of our free will as well as thine own. The
abbot and I have watched thee long, knowing that the Lord bad need of
such as thee elsewhere. We did but prove thee, to see by thy readiness
to obey, whether thou wert fit to rule. Go, and God be with thee. Covet
no man’s gold or silver. Neither eat flesh nor drink wine, but live as
thou hast lived--a Nazarite of the Lord. Fear not the face of man; but
look not on the face of woman. In an evil hour came they into the world,
the mothers of all mischiefs which I have seen under the sun. Come; the
abbot waits for us at the gate.’

With tears of surprise, joy, sorrow, almost of dread, Philammon hung
back.

‘Nay--come. Why shouldst thou break thy brethren’s hearts and ours by
many leave-takings! Bring from the storehouse a week’s provision of
dried dates and millet. The papyrus boat lies at the ferry; thou shalt
descend in it. The Lord will replace it for us when we need it. Speak
with no man on the river except the monks of God. When thou hast
gone five days’ journey downward, ask for the mouth of the canal
of Alexandria. Once in the city, any monk will guide thee to the
archbishop. Send us news of thy welfare by some holy mouth. Come.’

Silently they paced together down the glen to the lonely beach of the
great stream. Pambo was there already, his white hair glittering in the
rising moon, as with slow and feeble arms he launched the light canoe.
Philammon flung himself at the old men’s feet, and besought, with many
tears, their forgiveness and their blessing.’We have nothing to forgive.
Follow thou thine inward call. If it be of the flesh, it will avenge
itself; if it be of the Spirit, who are we that we should fight against
God? Farewell.’ A few minutes more, and the youth and his canoe were
lessening down the rapid stream in the golden summer twilight. Again a
minute, and the swift southern night had fallen, and all was dark but
the cold glare of the moon on the river, and on the rock-faces, and on
the two old men, as they knelt upon the beach, and with their heads upon
each other’s shoulders, like two children, sobbed and prayed together
for the lost darling of their age.



CHAPTER II: THE DYING WORLD


In the upper story of a house in the Museum Street of Alexandria, built
and fitted up on the old Athenian model, was a small room. It had been
chosen by its occupant, not merely on account of its quiet; for though
it was tolerably out of hearing of the female slaves who worked, and
chattered, and quarrelled under the cloisters of the women’s court on
the south side, yet it was exposed to the rattle of carriages and the
voices of passengers in the fashionable street below, and to strange
bursts of roaring, squealing, trumpeting from the Menagerie, a short way
off, on the opposite side of the street. The attraction of the situation
lay, perhaps, in the view which it commanded over the wall of the Museum
gardens, of flower-beds, shrubberies, fountains, statues, walks, and
alcoves, which had echoed for nearly seven hundred years to the wisdom
of the Alexandrian sages and poets. School after school, they had all
walked, and taught, and sung there, beneath the spreading planes and
chestnuts, figs and palm-trees. The place seemed fragrant with all
the riches of Greek thought and song, since the days when Ptolemy
Philadelphus walked there with Euclid and Theocritus, Callimachus and
Lycophron.

On the left of the garden stretched the lofty eastern front of
the Museum itself, with its picture galleries, halls of statuary,
dining-halls, and lecture-rooms; one huge wing containing that famous
library, founded by the father of Philadelphus, which hold in the time
of Seneca, even after the destruction of a great part of it in Caesar’s
siege, four hundred thousand manuscripts. There it towered up, the
wonder of the world, its white roof bright against the rainless blue;
and beyond it, among the ridges and pediments of noble buildings, a
broad glimpse of the bright blue sea.

The room was fitted up in the purest Greek style, not without an
affectation of archaism, in the severe forms and subdued half-tints of
the frescoes which ornamented the walls with scenes from the old myths
of Athene. Yet the general effect, even under the blazing sun which
poured in through the mosquito nets of the courtyard windows, was one
of exquisite coolness, and cleanliness, and repose. The room had neither
carpet nor fireplace; and the only movables in it were a sofa-bed, a
table, and an arm-chair, all of such delicate and graceful forms as may
be seen on ancient vases of a far earlier period than that whereof we
write. But, most probably, had any of us entered that room that morning,
we should not have been able to spare a look either for the furniture,
or the general effect, or the Museum gardens, or the sparkling
Mediterranean beyond; but we should have agreed that the room was
quite rich enough for human eyes, for the sake of one treasure which it
possessed, and, beside which, nothing was worth a moment’s glance. For
in the light arm-chair, reading a manuscript which lay on the table, sat
a woman, of some five-and-twenty years, evidently the tutelary goddess
of that little shrine, dressed in perfect keeping with the archaism of
the chamber, in simple old snow-white Ionic robe, falling to the feet
and reaching to the throat, and of that peculiarly severe and graceful
fashion in which the upper part of the dress falls downward again from
the neck to the waist in a sort of cape, entirely hiding the outline of
the bust, while it leaves the arms and the point of the shoulders bare.
Her dress was entirely without ornament, except the two narrow purple
stripes down the front, which marked her rank as a Roman citizen, the
gold embroidered shoes upon her feet, and the gold net, which looped
back, from her forehead to her neck, hair the colour and gloss of which
were hardly distinguishable from that of the metal itself, such as
Athene herself might heaven vied for tint, and mass, and ripple. Her
features, arms, and hands were of the severest and grandest type of old
Greek beauty, at once showing everywhere the high development of the
bones, and covering them with that firm, round, ripe outline, and waxy
morbidezza of skin, which the old Greeks owed to their continual use
not only of the bath and muscular exercise, but also of daily unguents.
There might have seemed to us too much sadness in that clear gray eye;
too much self-conscious restraint in those sharp curved lips; too much
affectation in the studied severity of her posture as she read, copied,
as it seemed, from some old vase or bas-relief. But the glorious grace
and beauty of every line of face and figure would have excused, even
hidden those defects, and we should have only recognised the marked
resemblance to the ideal portraits of Athene which adorned every panel
of the walls.

She has lifted her eyes off her manuscript; she is looking out with
kindling countenance over the gardens of the Museum; her ripe curling
Greek lips, such as we never see now, even among her own wives and
sisters, open. She is talking to herself. Listen!

‘Yes. The statues there are broken. The libraries are plundered. The
alcoves are silent. The oracles are dumb. And yet--who says that the old
faith of heroes and sages is dead? The beautiful can never die. If the
gods have deserted their oracles, they have not deserted the souls who
aspire to them. If they have ceased to guide nations, they have not
ceased to speak to their own elect. If they have cast off the vulgar
herd, they have not cast off Hypatia. ...............

‘Ay. To believe in the old creeds, while every one else is dropping away
from them.... To believe in spite of disappointments.... To hope against
hope.... To show oneself superior to the herd, by seeing boundless
depths of living glory in myths which have become dark and dead
to them.... To struggle to the last against the new and vulgar
superstitions of a rotting age, for the faith of my forefathers, for
the old gods, the old heroes, the old sages who gauged the mysteries of
heaven and earth--and perhaps to conquer--at least to have my reward!
To be welcomed into the celestial ranks of the heroic--to rise to the
immortal gods, to the ineffable powers, onward, upward ever, through
ages and through eternities, till I find my home at last, and vanish in
the glory of the Nameless and the Absolute One!....

And her whole face flashed out into wild glory, and then sank again
suddenly into a shudder of something like fear and disgust, as she saw,
watching her from under the wall of the gardens opposite, a crooked,
withered Jewish crone, dressed out in the most gorgeous and fantastic
style of barbaric finery.

‘Why does that old hag haunt me? I see her everywhere--till the last
month at least--and here she is again! I will ask the prefect to find
out who she is, and get rid of her, before she fascinates me with that
evil eye. Thank the gods, there she moves away! Foolish!--foolish of me,
a philosopher. I, to believe, against the authority of Porphyry himself,
too, in evil eyes and magic! But there is my father, pacing up and down
in the library.’

As she spoke, the old man entered from the next room. He was a Greek,
also, but of a more common, and, perhaps, lower type; dark and fiery,
thin and graceful; his delicate figure and cheeks, wasted by meditation,
harmonised well with the staid and simple philosophic cloak which he
wore as a sign of his profession. He paced impatiently up and down the
chamber, while his keen, glittering eyes and restless gestures betokened
intense inward thought.... ‘I have it.... No; again it escapes--it
contradicts itself. Miserable man that I am! If there is faith in
Pythagoras, the symbol should be an expanding series of the powers of
three; and yet that accursed binary factor will introduce itself. Did not
you work the sum out once, Hypatia?’

‘Sit down, my dear father, and eat. You have tasted no food yet this
day.’

‘What do I care for food! The inexpressible must be expressed, the work
must be done if it cost me the squaring of the circle. How can he, whose
sphere lies above the stars, stoop every moment to earth?

‘Ay,’ she answered, half bitterly, ‘and would that we could live without
food, and imitate perfectly the immortal gods. But while we are in this
prison-house of matter, we must wear our chain; even wear it gracefully,
if we have the good taste; and make the base necessities of this body
of shame symbolic of the divine food of the reason. There is fruit, with
lentils and rice, waiting for you in the next room; and bread, unless
you despise it too much.’

‘The food of slaves!’ he answered. ‘Well, I will eat, and be ashamed of
eating. Stay, did I tell you? Six new pupils in the mathematical school
this morning. It grows! It spreads! We shall conquer yet!’

She sighed. ‘How do you know that they have not come to you, as Critias
and Alcibiades did to Socrates, to learn a merely political and mundane
virtue? Strange! that men should be content to grovel, and be men, when
they might rise to the rank of gods! Ah, my father! That is my bitterest
grief! to see those who have been pretending in the morning lecture-room
to worship every word of mine as an oracle, lounging in the afternoon
round Pelagia’s litter; and then at night--for I know that they do
it--the dice, and the wine, and worse. That Pallas herself should be
conquered every day by Venus Pandemos! That Pelagia should have more
power than I! Not that such a creature as that disturbs me: no created
thing, I hope, can move my equanimity; but if I could stoop to hate--I
should hate her--hate her.’

And her voice took a tone which made it somewhat uncertain whether, in
spite of all the lofty impassibility which she felt bound to possess,
she did not hate Pelagia with a most human and mundane hatred.

But at that moment the conversation was cut short by the hasty entrance
of a slave girl, who, with fluttering voice, announced--

‘His excellency, madam, the prefect! His chariot has been at the gate
for these five minutes, and he is now coming upstairs.’

‘Foolish child!’ answered Hypatia, with some affectation of
indifference. ‘And why should that disturb me? Let him enter.’

The door opened, and in came, preceded by the scent of half a dozen
different perfumes, a florid, delicate-featured man, gorgeously dressed
out in senatorial costume, his fingers and neck covered with jewels.

‘The representative of the Caesars honours himself by offering at the
shrine of Athene Polias, and rejoices to see in her priestess as lovely
a likeness as ever of the goddess whom she serves.... Don’t betray me,
but I really cannot help talking sheer paganism whenever I find myself
within the influence of your eyes.’

‘Truth is mighty,’ said Hypatia, as she rose to greet him with a smile
and a reverence.

‘Ah, so they say--Your excellent father has vanished. He is really too
modest--honest, though--about his incapacity for state secrets. After
all, you know, it was your Minervaship which I came to consult. How
has this turbulent Alexandrian rascaldom been behaving itself in my
absence?’

‘The herd has been eating, and drinking, and marrying, as usual, I
believe,’ answered Hypatia, in a languid tone.

‘And multiplying, I don’t doubt. Well, there will be less loss to the
empire if I have to crucify a dozen or two, as I positively will, the
next riot. It is really a great comfort to a statesman that the masses
are so well aware that they deserve hanging, and therefore so careful to
prevent any danger of public justice depopulating the province. But how
go on the schools?’

Hypatia shook her head sadly.

‘Ah, boys will be boys.... I plead guilty myself. Video meliora
proboque, deteriora sequor. You must not be hard on us.... Whether we
obey you or not in private life, we do in public; and if we enthrone you
queen of Alexandria, you must allow your courtiers and bodyguards a
few court licences. Now don’t sigh or I shall be inconsolable. At all
events, your worst rival has betaken herself to the wilderness, and gone
to look for the city of the gods above the cataracts.’

‘Whom do you mean?’ asked Hypatia, in a tone most unphilosophically
eager.

‘Pelagia, of course. I met that prettiest and naughtiest of humanities
half-way between here and Thebes, transformed into a perfect Andromache
of chaste affection.’

‘And to whom, pray?’

‘To a certain Gothic giant. What men those barbarians do breed! I was
afraid of being crushed under the elephant’s foot at every step I took
with him!’

‘What!’ asked Hypatia, ‘did your excellency condescend to converse with
such savages?’

‘To tell you the truth, he had some forty stout countrymen of his with
him, who might have been troublesome to a perplexed prefect; not to
mention that it is always as well to keep on good terms with these
Goths. Really, after the sack of Rome, and Athens cleaned out like a
beehive by wasps, things begin to look serious. And as for the great
brute himself, he has rank enough in his way,--boasts of his descent
from some cannibal god or other,--really hardly deigned to speak to a
paltry Roman governor, till his faithful and adoring bride interceded
for me. Still, the fellow understood good living, and we celebrated our
new treaty of friendship with noble libations--but I must not talk about
that to you. However, I got rid of them; quoted all the geographical
lies I had ever heard, and a great many more; quickened their appetite
for their fool’s errand notably, and started them off again. So now the
star of Venus is set, and that of Pallas in the ascendant. Wherefore
tell me--what am I to do with Saint Firebrand?’

‘Cyril?’

‘Cyril.’

‘Justice.’

‘Ah, Fairest Wisdom, don’t mention that horrid word out of the
lecture-room. In theory it is all very well; but in poor imperfect
earthly practice, a governor must be content with doing very much what
comes to hand. In abstract justice, now, I ought to nail up Cyril,
deacons, district visitors, and all, in a row, on the sandfill out
side. That is simple enough; but, like a great many simple and excellent
things, impossible.’

‘You fear the people?’

‘Well, my dear lady, and has not the villainous demagogue got the whole
mob on his side? Am I to have the Constantinople riots re-enacted here?
I really cannot face it; I have not nerve for it; perhaps I am too lazy.
Be it so.’

Hypatia sighed. ‘Ah, that your excellency but saw the great duel which
depends on you alone! Do not fancy that the battle is merely between
Paganism and Christianity--’

‘Why, if it were, you know, I, as a Christian, under a Christian and
sainted emperor, not to mention his august sister--’

‘We understand,’ interrupted she, with an impatient wave of her
beautiful hand. ‘Not even between them; not even between philosophy and
barbarism. The struggle is simply one between the aristocracy and the
mob,--between wealth, refinement, art, learning, all that makes a nation
great, and the savage herd of child-breeders below, the many ignoble,
who were meant to labour for the noble few. Shall the Roman empire
command or obey her own slaves? is the question which you and Cyril have
to battle out; and the fight must be internecine.’

‘I should not wonder if it became so, really,’ answered the prefect,
with a shrug of his shoulders. ‘I expect every time I ride, to have my
brains knocked out by some mad monk.’

‘Why not? In an age when, as has been well and often said, emperors and
consulars crawl to the tombs of a tent-maker and a fisherman, and kiss
the mouldy bones of the vilest slaves? Why not, among a people whose
God is the crucified son of a carpenter? Why should learning, authority,
antiquity, birth, rank, the system of empire which has been growing up,
fed by the accumulated wisdom of ages,--why, I say, should any of
these things protect your life a moment from the fury of any beggar who
believes that the Son of God died for him as much as for you, and that
he is your equal if not your superior in the sight of his low-born and
illiterate deity!’ [Footnote: These are the arguments and the language
which were commonly employed by Porphyry, Julian, and the other
opponents of Christianity.]

‘My most eloquent philosopher, this may be--and perhaps is--all very
true. I quite agree that there are very great practical inconveniences
of this kind in the new--I mean the Catholic faith; but the world is
full of inconveniences. The wise man does not quarrel with his creed for
being disagreeable, any more than he does with his finger for aching: he
cannot help it, and must make the best of a bad matter. Only tell me how
to keep the peace.’

‘And let philosophy be destroyed?’

‘That it never will be, as long as Hypatia lives to illuminate the
earth; and, as far as I am concerned, I promise you a clear stage and--a
great deal of favour; as is proved by my visiting you publicly at this
moment, before I have given audience to one of the four hundred bores,
great and small, who are waiting in the tribunal to torment me. Do help
me and advise me. What am I to do?’

‘I have told you.’

‘Ah, yes, as to general principles. But out of the lecture-room I prefer
a practical expedient for instance, Cyril writes to me here--plague on
him! he would not let me even have a week’s hunting in peace-that there
is a plot on the part of the Jews to murder all the Christians. Here is
the precious document--do look at it, in pity. For aught I know or care,
the plot may be an exactly opposite one, and the Christians intend to
murder all the Jews. But I must take some notice of the letter.’

‘I do not see that, your excellency.’

‘Why, if anything did happen, after all, conceive the missives which
would be sent flying off to Constantinople against me!’

‘Let them go. If you are secure in the consciousness of innocence, what
matter?’

‘Consciousness of innocence? I shall lose my prefecture!’

‘Your danger would just be as great if you took notice of it. Whatever
happened, you would be accused of favouring the Jews.’

‘And really there might be some truth in the accusation. How the
finances of the provinces would go on without their kind assistance,
I dare not think. If those Christians would but lend me their money,
instead of building alms-houses and hospitals with it, they might burn
the Jews’ quarter to-morrow, for aught I care. But now....’

‘But now, you must absolutely take no notice of this letter. The very
tone of it forbids you, for your own honour, and the honour of
the empire. Are you to treat with a man who talks of the masses at
Alexandria as “the flock whom the King of kings has committed to his
rule and care”? Does your excellency, or this proud bishop, govern
Alexandria?’

‘Really, my dear lady, I have given up inquiring.’

‘But he has not. He comes to you as a person possessing an absolute
authority over two-thirds of the population, which he does not scruple
to hint to you is derived from a higher source than your own. The
consequence is clear. If it be from a higher source than yours, of
course it ought to control yours’; and you will confess that it ought
to control it--you will acknowledge the root and ground of every
extravagant claim which he makes, if you deign to reply.’

‘But I must say something, or I shall be pelted in the streets. You
philosophers, however raised above your own bodies you may be, must
really not forget that we poor worldlings have bones to be broken.’

‘Then tell him, and by word of mouth merely, that as the information
which he sends you comes from his private knowledge and concerns not
him as bishop, but you as magistrate, you can only take it into
consideration when he addresses you as a private person, laying a
regular information at your tribunal.’

‘Charming! queen of diplomatists as well as philosophers! I go to obey
you. Ah! why were you not Pulcheria? No, for then Alexandria had been
dark, and Orestes missed the supreme happiness of kissing a hand which
Pallas, when she made you, must have borrowed from the workshop of
Aphrodite.’

‘Recollect that you are a Christian,’ answered Hypatia, half smiling.

So the prefect departed; and passing through the outer hall, which was
already crowded with Hypatia’s aristocratic pupils and visitors, bowed
his way out past them and regained his chariot, chuckling over the
rebuff which he intended to administer to Cyril, and comforting himself
with the only text of Scripture of the inspiration of which he was
thoroughly convinced--‘Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.’

At the door was a crowd of chariots, slaves with their masters’
parasols, and the rabble of onlooking boys and market-folk, as usual in
Alexandria then, as in all great cities since, who were staring at the
prefect, and having their heads rapped by his guards, and wondering what
sort of glorious personage Hypatia might be, and what sort of glorious
house she must live in, to be fit company for the great governor of
Alexandria. Not that there was not many a sulky and lowering face
among the mob, for the great majority of them were Christians, and
very seditious and turbulent politicians, as Alexandrians, ‘men of
Macedonia,’ were bound to be; and there was many a grumble among them,
all but audible, at the prefect’s going in state to the heathen woman’s
house--heathen sorceress, some pious old woman called her--before he
heard any poor soul’s petition in the tribunal, or even said his prayers
in church.

Just as he was stepping into his curricle a tall young man, as
gorgeously bedizened as himself, lounged down the steps after him, and
beckoned lazily to the black boy who carried his parasol.

‘Ah, Raphael Aben-Ezra! my excellent friend, what propitious
deity--ahem! martyr--brings you to Alexandria just as I want you? Get up
by my side, and let us have a chat on our way to the tribunal.’

The man addressed came slowly forward with an ostentatiously low
salutation, which could not hide, and indeed was not intended to
hide, the contemptuous and lazy expression of his face; and asked in a
drawling tone--

‘And for what kind purpose does the representative of the Caesars bestow
such an honour on the humblest of his, etc. etc.--your penetration will
supply the rest.’

‘Don’t be frightened; I am not going to borrow money of you,’ answered
Orestes, laughingly, as the Jew got into the curricle.

‘I am glad to hear it. Really one usurer in a family is enough. My
father made the gold, and if I spend it, I consider that I do all that
is required of a philosopher.’

‘A charming team of white Nisaeans, is not this? And only one gray foot
among all the four.’

‘Yes.... horses are a bore, I begin to find, like everything else.
Always falling sick, or running away, or breaking one’s peace of mind in
some way or other. Besides, I have been pestered out of my life there
in Cyrene, by commissions for dogs and horses and bows from that old
Episcopal Nimrod, Synesius.’

‘What, is the worthy man as lively as ever?’

‘Lively? He nearly drove me into a nervous fever in three days. Up at
four in the morning, always in the most disgustingly good health and
spirits, farming, coursing, shooting, riding over hedge and ditch
after rascally black robbers; preaching, intriguing, borrowing money;
baptizing and excommunicating; bullying that bully, Andronicus;
comforting old women, and giving pretty girls dowries; scribbling one
half-hour on philosophy, and the next on farriery; sitting up all night
writing hymns and drinking strong liquors; off again on horseback at
four the next morning; and talking by the hour all the while about
philosophic abstraction from the mundane tempest. Heaven defend me
from all two-legged whirlwinds! By the bye, there was a fair daughter of
my nation came back to Alexandria in the same ship with me, with a cargo
that may suit your highness.’

‘There are a great many fair daughters of your nation who might suit me,
without any cargo at all.’

‘Ah, they have had good practice, the little fools, ever since the days
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat. But I mean old Miriam--you know. She has
been lending Synesius money to fight the black fellows with; and really
it was high time. They had burnt every homestead for miles through the
province. But the daring old girl must do a little business for herself;
so she went off, in the teeth of the barbarians, right away to the
Atlas, bought all their lady prisoners, and some of their own sons and
daughters, too, of them, for beads and old iron; and has come back with
as pretty a cargo of Lybian beauties as a prefect of good taste could
wish to have the first choice of. You may thank me for that privilege.’

‘After, of course, you had suited yourself, my cunning Raphael?’

‘Not I. Women are bores, as Solomon found out long ago. Did I never tell
you? I began, as he did, with the most select harem in Alexandria. But
they quarrelled so, that one day I went out, and sold them all but one,
who was a Jewess--so there were objections on the part of the Rabbis.
Then I tried one, as Solomon did; but my “garden shut up,” and my
“sealed fountain” wanted me to be always in love with her, so I went to
the lawyers, allowed her a comfortable maintenance, and now I am as free
as a monk, and shall be happy to give your excellency the benefit of any
good taste or experience which I may possess.’

‘Thanks, worthy Jew. We are not yet as exalted as yourself, and will
send for the old Erictho this very afternoon. Now listen a moment to
base, earthly, and political business. Cyril has written to me, to say
that you Jews have plotted to murder all the Christians.’

‘Well--why not? I most heartily wish it were true, and think, on the
whole, that it very probably is so.’

‘By the immortal--saints, man! you are not serious?’

‘The four archangels forbid! It is no concern of mine. All I say is,
that my people are great fools, like the rest of the world; and have,
for aught I know or care, some such intention. They won’t succeed, of
course; and that is all you have to care for. But if you think it worth
the trouble--which I do not--I shall have to go to the synagogue on
business in a week or so, and then I would ask some of the Rabbis.’

‘Laziest of men!--and I must answer Cyril this very day.’

‘An additional reason for asking no questions of our people. Now you can
honestly say that you know nothing about the matter.’

‘Well, after all, ignorance is a stronghold for poor statesmen. So you
need not hurry yourself.’

‘I assure your excellency I will not.’

‘Ten days hence, or so, you know.’

‘Exactly, after it is all over.’

‘And can’t be helped. What a comfort it is, now and then, that Can’t be
helped!’

‘It is the root and marrow of all philosophy. Your practical man, poor
wretch, will try to help this and that, and torment his soul with ways
and means, and preventives and forestallings; your philosopher quietly
says--It can’t be helped. If it ought to be, it will be--if it is, it
ought to be. We did not make the world, and we are not responsible for
it.--There is the sum and substance of all true wisdom, and the epitome
of all that has been said and written thereon from Philo the Jew to
Hypatia the Gentile. By the way, here’s Cyril coming down the steps of
the Caesareum. A very handsome fellow, after all, though lie is looking
as sulky as a bear.’

‘With his cubs at his heels. What a scoundrelly visage that tall
fellow-deacon, or reader, or whatever he is by his dress--has!’

‘There they are--whispering together. Heaven give them pleasant thoughts
and pleasanter faces!’

‘Amen!’ quoth Orestes, with a sneer: and he would have said Amen in
good earnest, had he been able to take the liberty--which we shall--and
listen to Cyril’s answer to Peter, the tall reader.

‘From Hypatia’s, you say? Why, he only returned to the city this
morning.’

‘I saw his four-in-hand standing at her door, as I came down the Museum
Street hither, half an hour ago.’

‘And twenty carriages besides, I don’t doubt?’

‘The street was blocked up with them. There! Look round the corner
now.--Chariots, litters, slaves, and fops.--When shall we see such a
concourse as that where it ought to be?’

Cyril made no answer; and Peter went on--‘Where it ought to be, my
father--in front of your door at the Serapeium?’

‘The world, the flesh, and the devil know their own, Peter: and as long
as they have their own to go to, we cannot expect them to come to us.’

‘But what if their own were taken out of the way?’

‘They might come to us for want of better amusement.... devil and all.
Well--if I could get a fair hold of the two first, I would take the
third into the bargain, and see what could be done with him. But
never, while these lecture-rooms last--these Egyptian chambers of
imagery--these theatres of Satan, where the devil transforms himself
into an angel of light, and apes Christian virtue, and bedizens his
ministers like ministers of righteousness, as long as that lecture-room
stands and the great and the powerful flock to it, to learn excuses for
their own tyrannies and atheisms, so long will the kingdom of God be
trampled under foot in Alexandria; so long will the princes of this
world, with their gladiators, and parasites, and money-lenders, be
masters here, and not the bishops and priests of the living God.’

It was now Peter’s turn to be silent; and as the two, with their little
knot of district-visitors behind them, walk moodily along the great
esplanade which overlooked the harbour, and then vanish suddenly up some
dingy alley into the crowded misery of the sailors’ quarter, we will
leave them to go about their errand of mercy, and, like fashionable
people, keep to the grand parade, and listen again to our two
fashionable friends in the carved and gilded curricle with four white
blood-horses.

‘A fine sparkling breeze outside the Pharos, Raphael--fair for the
wheat-ships too.’

‘Are they gone yet?

‘Yes--why? I sent the first fleet off three days ago; and the rest are
clearing outwards to-day.’

‘Oh!--ah--so!--Then you have not heard from Heraclian?’

‘Heraclian? What the-blessed saints has the Count of Africa to do with
my wheat-ships?’

‘Oh, nothing. It’s no business of mine. Only he is going to rebel ....
But here we are at your door.’

‘To what?’ asked Orestes, in a horrified tone.

‘To rebel, and attack Rome.’

‘Good gods--God, I mean. A fresh bore! Come in, and tell a poor
miserable slave of a governor--speak low, for Heaven’s sake!--I hope
these rascally grooms haven’t overheard you.’

‘Easy to throw them into the canal, if they have,’ quoth Raphael, as he
walked coolly through hall and corridor after the perturbed governor.

Poor Orestes never stopped till he reached a little chamber of the inner
court, beckoned the Jew in after him, locked the door, threw himself
into an arm-chair, put his hands on his knees, and sat, bending forward,
staring into Raphael’s face with a ludicrous terror and perplexity.

‘Tell me all about it. Tell me this instant.’

‘I have told you all I know,’ quoth Raphael, quietly seating himself on
a sofa, and playing with a jewelled dagger. ‘I thought, of course, that
you were in the secret, or I should have said nothing. It’s no business
of mine, you know.’

Orestes, like most weak and luxurious men, Romans especially, had a
wild-beast vein in him--and it burst forth.

‘Hell and the furies! You insolent provincial slave--you will carry
these liberties of yours too far! Do you know who I am, you accursed
Jew? Tell me the whole truth, or, by the head of the emperor, I’ll twist
it out of you with red-hot pincers!’

Raphael’s countenance assumed a dogged expression, which showed that
the old Jewish blood still heat true, under all its affected shell of
Neo-Platonist nonchalance; and there was a quiet unpleasant earnest in
his smile, as he answered--

‘Then, my dear governor, you will be the first man on earth who ever yet
forced a Jew to say or do what he did not choose.’

‘We’ll see!’ yelled Orestes. ‘Here, slaves!’ And he clapped his hands
loudly.

‘Calm yourself, your excellency,’ quoth Raphael, rising. ‘The door
is locked; the mosquito net is across the window; and this dagger
is poisoned. If anything happens to me, you will offend all the Jew
money-lenders, and die in about three days in a great deal of pain,
having missed our assignation with old Miriam, lost your pleasantest
companion, and left your own finances and those of the prefecture in a
considerable state of embarrassment. How much better to sit down, hear
all I have to say philosophically, like a true pupil of Hypatia, and not
expect a man to tell you what he really does not know.’

Orestes, after looking vainly round the room for a place to escape, had
quietly subsided into his chair again; and by the time that the slaves
knocked at the door he had so far recovered his philosophy as to ask,
not for the torturers, but for a page and wine.

‘Oh, you Jews!’ quoth he, trying to laugh off matters. ‘The same
incarnate fiends that Titus found you!’

‘The very same, my dear prefect. Now for this matter, which is really
important-at least to Gentiles. Heraclian will certainly rebel. Synesius
let out as much to me. He has fitted out an armament for Ostia, stopped
his own wheat-ships, and is going to write to you to stop yours, and to
starve out the Eternal City, Goths, senate, emperor, and all. Whether
you will comply with his reasonable little request depends of course on
yourself.’

‘And that again very much on his plans.’

‘Of course. You cannot be expected to--we will euphemise-unless it be
made worth your while.’

Orestes sat buried in deep thought.

‘Of course not,’ said he at last, half unconsciously. And then, in
sudden dread of having committed himself, he looked up fiercely at the
Jew.

‘And how do I know that this is not some infernal trap of yours? Tell me
how you found out all this, or by Hercules (he had quite forgotten his
Christianity by this time)--by Hercules and the Twelve Gods, I’ll--’

‘Don’t use expressions unworthy of a philosopher. My source of
information was very simple and very good. He has been negotiating a
loan from the Rabbis at Carthage. They were either frightened, or loyal,
or both, and hung back. He knew--as all wise governors know when they
allow themselves time--that it is no use to bully a Jew; slid applied to
me. I never lend money--it is unphilosophical: but I introduced him to
old Miriam, who dare do business with the devil himself; and by that
move, whether he has the money or not, I cannot tell: but this I can
tell, that we have his secret--and so have you now; and if you want more
information, the old woman, who enjoys an intrigue as much as she does
Falernian, will get it you.’

‘Well, you are a true friend, after all.’

‘Of course I am. Now, is not this method of getting at the truth much
easier and pleasanter than setting a couple of dirty negroes to pinch
and pull me, and so making it a point of honour with me to tell you
nothing but lies? Here comes Ganymede with the wine, just in time to
calm your nerves, and fill you with the spirit of divination.... To the
goddess of good counsels, my lord. What wine this is!’

‘True Syrian--fire and honey; fourteen years old next vintage, my
Raphael. Out, Hypocorisma! See that he is not listening. The impudent
rascal! I was humbugged into giving two thousand gold pieces for him
two years ago, he was so pretty--they said he was only just rising
thirteen--and he has been the plague of my life ever since, and is
beginning to want the barber already. Now, what is the count dreaming
of?’

‘His wages for killing Stilicho.’

‘What, is it not enough to be Count of Africa?’

‘I suppose he sets off against that his services during the last three
years.’

‘Well, he saved Africa.’

‘And thereby Egypt also. And you too, as well as the emperor, may be
considered as owing him somewhat.’

‘My good friend, my debts are far too numerous for me to think of paying
any of them. But what wages does he want?’

‘The purple.’

Orestes started, and then fell into thought. Raphael sat watching him a
while.

‘Now, most noble lord, may I depart? I have said all I have to say; and
unless I get home to luncheon at once, I shall hardly have time to find
old Miriam for you, and get through our little affair with her before
sunset.’

‘Stay. What force has he?’

‘Forty thousand already, they say. And those Donatist ruffians are with
him to a man, if he can but scrape together wherewith to change their
bludgeons into good steel.’

‘Well, go.... So. A hundred thousand might do it,’ said he, meditating,
as Raphael bowed himself out. ‘He won’t get them. I don’t know,
though; the man has the head of a Julius. Well--that fool Attalus talked
of joining Egypt to the Western Empire.... Not such a bad thought either.
Anything is better than being governed by an idiot child and three
canting nuns. I expect to be excommunicated every day for some offence
against Pulcheria’s prudery.... Heraclian emperor at Rome.... and I
lord and master on this side the sea. The Donatists pitted again fairly
against the orthodox, to cut each other’s throats in peace.... no more
of Cyril’s spying and tale-bearing to Constantinople.... Not such a
baddish of fare.... But then-it would take so much trouble!’

With which words, Orestes went into his third warm bath for that day.



CHAPTER III: THE GOTHS


For two days the young monk held on, paddling and floating rapidly down
the Nile-stream, leaving city after city to right and left with longing
eyes, and looking back to one villa after another, till the reaches of
the banks hid them from his sight, with many a yearning to know what
sort of places those gay buildings and gardens would look like on a
nearer view, and what sort of life the thousands led who crowded the
busy quays, and walked and drove, in an endless stream, along the great
highroads which ran along either bank. He carefully avoided every
boat that passed him, from the gilded barge of the wealthy landlord or
merchant, to the tiny raft buoyed up with empty jars, which was floating
down to be sold at some market in the Delta. Here and there he met and
hailed a crew of monks, drawing their nets in a quiet bay, or passing
along the great watery highway from monastery to monastery: but all the
news he received from them was, that the canal of Alexandria was still
several days’ journey below him. It seemed endless, that monotonous
vista of the two high clay banks, with their sluices and water-wheels,
their knots of palms and date-trees; endless seemed that wearisome
succession of bars of sand and banks of mud, every one like the one
before it, every one dotted with the same line of logs and stones strewn
along the water’s edge, which turned out as he approached them to be
basking crocodiles and sleeping pelicans. His eye, wearied with the
continual confinement and want of distance, longed for the boundless
expanse of the desert, for the jagged outlines of those far-off hills,
which he had watched from boyhood rising mysteriously at morn out of
the eastern sky, and melting mysteriously into it again at even, beyond
which dwelt a whole world of wonders, elephants and dragons, satyrs and
anthropophagi,--ay, and the phoenix itself. Tired and melancholy, his
mind returned inward to prey on itself, and the last words of Arsenius
rose again and again to his thoughts. ‘Was his call of the spirit or of
the flesh?’ How should he test that problem? He wished to seethe world
that might be carnal. True; but, he wished to convert the world.... was
not that spiritual? Was he not going on a noble errand?.... thirsting
for toil, for saintship, for martyrdom itself, if it would but come and
cut the Gordian knot of all temptations, and save him-for he dimly
felt that it would save him--a whole sea of trouble in getting safe and
triumphant out of that world into which he had not yet entered .... and
his heart shrank back from the untried homeless wilderness before
him. But no! the die was cast, and he must down and onward, whether in
obedience to the spirit or the flesh. Oh, for one hour of the quiet of
that dear Laura and the old familiar faces!

At last, a sudden turn of the bank brought him in sight of a
gaudily-painted barge, oil board of which armed men, in uncouth and
foreign dresses, were chasing with barbaric shouts some large object in
the water. In the bows stood a man of gigantic stature, brandishing a
harpoon in his right hand, and in his left holding the line of a second,
the head of which was fixed in the huge purple sides of a hippopotamus,
who foamed and wallowed a few yards down the stream. An old grizzled
warrior at the stern, with a rudder in either hand, kept the boat’s
head continually towards the monster, in spite of its sudden and frantic
wheelings; and when it dashed madly across the stream, some twenty oars
flashed through the water in pursuit. All was activity and excitement;
and it was no wonder if Philammon’s curiosity had tempted him to drift
down almost abreast of the barge ere he descried, peeping from under a
decorated awning in the afterpart, some dozen pairs of languishing
black eyes, turned alternately to the game and to himself. The
serpents!--chattering and smiling, with pretty little shrieks and
shaking of glossy curls and gold necklaces, and fluttering of muslin
dresses, within a dozen yards of him! Blushing scarlet, he knew not
why, he seized his paddle, and tried to back out of the snare.... but
somehow, his very efforts to escape those sparkling eyes diverted his
attention from everything else: the hippopotamus had caught sight of
him, and furious with pain, rushed straight at the unoffending canoe;
the harpoon line became entangled round his body, and in a moment he
and his frail bark were overturned, and the monster, with his huge white
tusks gaping wide, close on him as he struggled in the stream.

Luckily Philammon, contrary to the wont of monks, was a bather, and swam
like a water-fowl: fear he had never known: death from childhood had
been to him, as to the other inmates of the Laura, a contemplation too
perpetual to have any paralysing terror in it, even then, when life
seemed just about to open on him anew. But the monk was a man, and a
young one, and had no intention of dying tamely or unavenged. In an
instant he had freed himself from the line; drawn the short knife which
was his only weapon; and diving suddenly, avoided the monster’s rush,
and attacked him from behind with stabs, which, though not deep, still
dyed the waters with gore at every stroke. The barbarians shouted with
delight. The hippopotamus turned furiously against his new assailant,
crushing, alas! the empty canoe to fragments with a single snap of his
enormous jaws; but the turn was fatal to him; the barge was close upon
him, and as he presented his broad side to the blow, the sinewy arm of
the giant drove a harpoon through his heart, and with one convulsive
shudder the huge blue mass turned over on its side and floated dead.

Poor Philammon! He alone was silent, amid the yells of triumph;
sorrowfully he swam round and round his little paper wreck.... it would
not have floated a mouse. Wistfully be eyed the distant banks, half
minded to strike out for them and escape,.... and thought of the
crocodiles,.... and paddled round again,.... and thought of the
basilisk eyes;.... he might escape the crocodiles, but who could escape
women?.... and he struck out valiantly for shore.... when he was brought
to a sudden stop by finding the stem of the barge close on him, a noose
thrown over him by some friendly barbarian, and himself hauled on
board, amid the laughter, praise, astonishment, and grumbling of the
good-natured crew, who had expected him, as a matter of course, to avail
himself at once of their help, and could not conceive the cause of his
reluctance.

Philammon gazed with wonder on his strange hosts, their pale
complexions, globular heads and faces, high cheek-bones, tall and sturdy
figures; their red beards, and yellow hair knotted fantastically above
the head; their awkward dresses, half Roman or Egyptian, and half
of foreign fur, soiled and stained in many a storm and fight, but
tastelessly bedizened with classic jewels, brooches, and Roman coins,
strung like necklaces. Only the steersman, who had come forward to
wonder at the hippopotamus, and to help in dragging the unwieldy brute
on board, seemed to keep genuine and unornamented the costume of his
race, the white linen leggings, strapped with thongs of deerskin, the
quilted leather cuirass, the bears’-fur cloak, the only ornaments of
which were the fangs and claws of the beast itself, and a fringe of
grizzled tufts, which looked but too like human hair. The language which
they spoke was utterly unintelligible to Philammon, though it need not
be so to us.

‘A well-grown lad and a brave one, Wulf the son of Ovida,’ said the
giant to the old hero of the bearskin cloak; ‘and understands wearing
skins, in this furnace-mouth of a climate, rather better than you do.’

‘I keep to the dress of my forefathers, Amalric the Amal. What did to
sack Rome in, may do to find Asgard in.’

The giant, who was decked out with helmet, cuirass, and senatorial
boots, in a sort of mongrel mixture of the Roman military and civil
dress, his neck wreathed with a dozen gold chains, and every finger
sparkling with jewels, turned away with an impatient sneer.

‘Asgard--Asgard! If you are in such a hurry to get to Asgard up this
ditch in the sand, you had better ask the fellow how far it is thither.’

Wulf took him quietly at his word, and addressed a question to the young
monk, which he could only answer by a shake of the head.

‘Ask him in Greek, man.’

‘Greek is a slave’s tongue. Make a slave talk to him in it, not me.’

‘Here--some of you girls! Pelagia! you understand this fellow’s talk.
Ask him how far it is to Asgard.’

‘You must ask me more civilly, my rough hero,’ replied a soft voice from
underneath the awning. ‘Beauty must be sued, and not commanded.’

‘Come, then, my olive-tree, my gazelle, my lotus-flower, my--what was
the last nonsense you taught me?--and ask this wild man of the sands how
far it is from these accursed endless rabbit-burrows to Asgard.’

The awning was raised, and lying luxuriously on a soft mattress,
fanned with peacock’s feathers, and glittering with rubies and topazes,
appeared such a vision as Philammon had never seen before.

A woman of some two-and-twenty summers, formed in the most voluptuous
mould of Grecian beauty, whose complexion showed every violet vein
through its veil of luscious brown. Her little bare feet, as they
dimpled the cushions, were more perfect than Aphrodite’s, softer than a
swan’s bosom. Every swell of her bust and arms showed through the thin
gauze robe, while her lower limbs were wrapped in a shawl of orange
silk, embroidered with wreaths of shells and roses. Her dark hair lay
carefully spread out upon the pillow, in a thousand ringlets entwined
with gold and jewels; her languishing eyes blazed like diamonds from
a cavern, under eyelids darkened and deepened with black antimony; her
lips pouted of themselves, by habit or by nature, into a perpetual kiss;
slowly she raised one little lazy hand; slowly the ripe lips opened; and
in most pure and melodious Attic, she lisped her huge lover’s question
to the monk, and repeated it before the boy could shake off the spell,
and answer....

‘Asgard? What is Asgard?’

The beauty looked at the giant for further instructions.

‘The City of the immortal Gods,’ interposed the old warrior, hastily and
sternly, to the lady.

‘The city of God is in heaven,’ said Philammon to the interpreter,
turning his head away from those gleaming, luscious, searching glances.

His answer was received with a general laugh by all except the leader,
who shrugged his shoulders.

‘It may as well be up in the skies as up the Nile. We shall be just
as likely, I believe, to reach it by flying, as by rowing up this big
ditch. Ask him where the river comes from, Pelagia.’

Pelagia obeyed.... and thereon followed a confusion worse confounded,
composed of all the impossible wonders of that mythic fairyland with
which Philammon had gorged himself from boyhood in his walks with the
old monks, and of the equally trustworthy traditions which the Goths had
picked up at Alexandria. There was nothing which that river did not do.
It rose in the Caucasus. Where was the Caucasus? He did not know. In
Paradise--in Indian Aethiopia--in Aethiopian India. Where were they? He
did not know. Nobody knew. It ran for a hundred and fifty days’ journey
through deserts where nothing but flying serpents and satyrs lived, and
the very lions’ manes were burnt off by the heat....

‘Good sporting there, at all events, among these dragons,’ quoth Smid
the son of Troll, armourer to the party.

‘As good as Thor’s when he caught Snake Midgard with the bullock’s
head,’ said Wulf.

It turned to the east for a hundred days’ journey more, all round Arabia
and India, among forests full of elephants and dog-headed women.

‘Better and better, Smid!’ growled Wulf, approvingly.

‘Fresh beef cheap there, Prince Wulf, eh?’ quoth Smid; ‘I must look over
the arrow-heads.’

--To the mountains of the Hyperboreans, where there was eternal night,
and the air was full of feathers.... That is, one-third of it came from
thence, and another third came from the Southern ocean, over the Moon
mountains, where no one had ever been, and the remaining third from the
country where the phoenix lived, and nobody knew where that was. And
then there were the cataracts, and the inundations-and-and-and above the
cataracts, nothing but sand-hills and ruins, as full of devils as they
could hold.... and as for Asgard, no one had ever heard of it.... till
every face grew longer and longer, as Pelagia went on interpreting and
misinterpreting; and at last the giant smote his hand upon his knee, and
swore a great oath that Asgard might rot till the twilight of the gods
before he went a step farther up the Nile.

‘Curse the monk!’ growled Wulf. ‘How should such a poor beast know
anything about the matter?’

‘Why should not he know as well as that ape of a Roman governor?’ asked
Smid.

‘Oh, the monks know everything,’ said Pelagia. ‘They go hundreds and
thousands of miles up the river, and cross the deserts among fiends and
monsters, where any one else would be eaten up, or go mad at once.’

‘Ah, the dear holy men! It’s all by the sign of the blessed cross!’
exclaimed all the girls together, devoutly crossing themselves, while
two or three of the most enthusiastic were half-minded to go forward and
kneel to Philammon for his blessing; but hesitated, their Gothic lovers
being heathenishly stupid and prudish on such points.

‘Why should he not know as well as the prefect? Well said, Smid! I
believe that prefect’s quill-driver was humbugging us when he said
Asgard was only ten days’ sail up.’

‘Why?’ asked Wulf.

‘I never give any reasons. What’s the use of being an Amal, and a son
of Odin, if one has always to be giving reasons like a rascally Roman
lawyer? I say the governor looked like a liar; and I say this monk looks
like an honest fellow; and I choose to believe him, and there is an end
of it.’

‘Don’t look so cross at me, Prince Wulf; I’m sure it’s not my fault; I
could only say what the monk told me,’ whispered poor Pelagia.

‘Who looks cross at you, my queen?’ roared the Amal. ‘Let me have him
out here, and by Thor’s hammer, I’ll--’

‘Who spoke to you, you stupid darling?’ answered Pelagia, who lived in
hourly fear of thunderstorms. ‘Who is going to be cross with any one,
except I with you, for mishearing and misunderstanding, and meddling,
as you are always doing? I shall do as I threatened, and run away with
Prince Wulf, if you are not good. Don’t you see that the whole crew are
expecting you to make them an oration?’

Whereupon the Amal rose.

‘See you here, Wulf the son of Ovida, and warriors all! If we want
wealth, we shan’t find it among the sand-hills. If we want women, we
shall find nothing prettier than these among dragons and devils. Don’t
look angry, Wulf. You have no mind to marry one of those dog-headed
girls the monk talked of, have you? Well, then, we have money and women;
and if we want sport, it’s better sport killing men than killing beasts;
so we had better go where we shall find most of that game, which we
certainly shall not up this road. As for fame and all that, though I’ve
had enough, there’s plenty to be got anywhere along the shores of that
Mediterranean. Let’s burn and plunder Alexandria: forty of us Goths
might kill down all these donkey-riders in two days, and hang up that
lying prefect who sent us hereon this fool’s errand. Don’t answer, Wulf.
I knew he was humbugging us all along, but you were so open-mouthed to
all he said, that I was bound to let my elders choose for me. Let’s
go back; send over for any of the tribes; send to Spain for those
Vandals--they have had enough of Adolf by now, curse him!--I’ll warrant
them; get together an army, and take Constantinople. I’ll be Augustus,
and Pelagia, Augusta; you and Smid here, the two Caesars; and we’ll make
the monk the chief of the eunuchs, eh?--anything you like for a quiet
life; but up this accursed kennel of hot water I go no farther. Ask your
girls, my heroes, and I’ll ask mine. Women are all prophetesses, every
one of them.’

‘When they are not harlots,’ growled Wulf to himself.

‘I will go to the world’s end with you, my king!’ sighed Pelagia; ‘but
Alexandria is certainly pleasanter than this.’

Old Wulf sprang up fiercely enough.

‘Hear me, Amalric the Amal, son of Odin, and heroes all! When my fathers
swore to be Odin’s men, and gave up the kingdom to the holy Annals, the
sons of the Aesir, what was the bond between your fathers and mine? Was
it not that we should move and move, southward and southward ever, till
we came back to Asgard, the city where Odin dwells for ever, and gave
into his hands the kingdom of all the earth? And did we not keep our
oath? Have we not held to the Amals? Did we not leave Adolf, because we
would not follow a Balth, while there was an Amal to lead us? Have we
not been true men to you, son of the Aesir?’

‘No man ever saw Wulf, the son of Ovida, fail friend or foe.’

‘Then why does his friend fail him? Why does his friend fail himself? If
the bison-bull lie down and wallow, what will the herd do for a leader?
If the king-wolf lose the scent, how will the pack hold it? If the
Yngling forgets the song of Asgard, who will sing it to the heroes?’

‘Sing it yourself, if you choose. Pelagia sings quite well enough for
me.’

In an instant the cunning beauty caught at the hint, and poured forth a
soft, low, sleepy song:--

‘Loose the sail, rest the oar, float away down, Fleeting and gliding by
tower and town; Life is so short at best! snatch, while thou canst, thy
rest, Sleeping by me!’

‘Can you answer that, Wulf?’ shouted a dozen voices.

‘Hear the song of Asgard, warriors of the Goths! Did not Alaric the king
love it well? Did I not sing it before him in the palace of the Caesars,
till he swore, for all the Christian that he was, to go southward in
search of the holy city? And when he went to Valhalla, and the ships
were wrecked off Sicily, and Adolf the Balth turned back like a lazy
hound, and married the daughter of the Romans, whom Odin hates, and went
northward again to Gaul, did not I sing you all the song of Asgard in
Messina there, till you swore to follow the Amal through fire and water
until we found the hall of Odin, and received the mead-cup from his own
hand? Hear it again, warriors of the Goths!’

‘Not that song!’ roared the Amal, stopping his ears with both his hands.
‘Will you drive us blood-mad again, just as we are settling down into
our sober senses, and finding out what our lives were given us for?’

‘Hear the song of Asgard! On to Asgard, wolves of the Goths!’ shouted
another; and a babel of voices arose.

‘Haven’t we been fighting and marching these seven years?’

‘Haven’t we drunk blood enough to satisfy Odin ten times over? If he
wants us lot him come himself and lead us!’

‘Let us get our winds again before we start afresh!’

‘Wulf the Prince is like his name, and never tires; he has a
winter-wolf’s legs under him; that is no reason why we should have.’

‘Haven’t you heard what the monk says?-we can never get ever those
cataracts.’

‘We’ll stop his old wives’ tales for him, and then settle for
ourselves,’ said Smid; and springing from the thwart where he had been
sitting, he caught up a bill with one hand, and seized Philammon’s
throat with the other.... in a moment more, it would have been all over
with him....

For the first time in his life Philammon felt a hostile gripe upon him,
and a new sensation rushed through every nerve, as he grappled with the
warrior, clutched with his left hand the up-lifted wrist, and with his
right the girdle, and commenced, without any definite aim, a fierce
struggle, which, strange to say, as it went on, grew absolutely
pleasant.

The women shrieked to their lovers to part the combatants, but in vain.

‘Not for worlds! A very fair match and a very fair fight! Take your long
legs back, Itho, or they will be over you! That’s right, my Smid, don’t
use the knife! They will be overboard in a moment! By all the Valkyrs,
they are down, and Smid undermost!’

There was no doubt of it; and in another moment Philammon would have
wrenched the bill out of his opponent’s hand, when, to the utter
astonishment of the onlookers, he suddenly loosed his hold, shook
himself free by one powerful wrench, and quietly retreated to his seat,
conscience-stricken at the fearful thirst for blood which had suddenly
boiled up within him as he felt his enemy under him.

The onlookers were struck dumb with astonishment; they had taken for
granted that he would, as a matter of course, have used his right of
splitting his vanquished opponent’s skull--an event which they would
of course have deeply deplored, but with which, as men of honour, they
could not on any account interfere, but merely console themselves for
the loss of their comrade by flaying his conqueror alive, ‘carving him
into the blood-eagle,’ or any other delicate ceremony which might serve
as a vent for their sorrow and a comfort to the soul of the deceased.

Smid rose, with a bill in his hand, and looked round him-perhaps to
see what was expected of him. He half lifted his weapon to strike ....
Philammon, seated, looked him calmly in the face.... The old warrior’s
eye caught the bank, which was now receding rapidly past them; and when
he saw that they were really floating downwards again, without an
effort to stem the stream, he put away his bill, and sat himself down
deliberately in his place, astonishing the onlookers quite as much as
Philammon had done.

‘Five minutes’ good fighting, and no one killed! This is a shame!’ quoth
another. ‘Blood we must see, and it had better be yours, master monk,
than your betters’,’--and therewith he rushed on poor Philammon.

He spoke the heart of the crew; the sleeping wolf in them had
been awakened by the struggle, and blood they would have; and not
frantically, like Celts or Egyptians, but with the cool humorous cruelty
of the Teuton, they rose altogether, and turning Philammon over on his
back, deliberated by what death he should die.

Philammon quietly submitted--if submission have anything to do with that
state of mind in which sheer astonishment and novelty have broken up all
the custom of man’s nature, till the strangest deeds and sufferings are
taken as matters of course. His sudden escape from the Laura, the new
world of thought and action into which he had been plunged, the new
companions with whom he had fallen in, had driven him utterly from his
moorings, and now anything and everything might happen to him. He who
had promised never to look upon woman found himself, by circumstances
over which he had no control, amid a boatful of the most objectionable
species of that most objectionable genus--and the utterly worst having
happened, everything else which happened must be better than the worst.
For the rest, he had gone forth to see the world--and this was one of
the ways of it. So he made up his mind to see it, and be filled with the
fruit of his own devices.

And he would have been certainly filled with the same in five minutes
more, in some shape too ugly to be mentioned: but, as even sinful women
have hearts in them, Pelagia shrieked out--

‘Amalric! Amalric! do not let them! I cannot bear it!’

‘The warriors are free men, my darling, and know what is proper. And
what can the life of such a brute be to you?’

Before he could stop her, Pelagia had sprung from her cushions, and
thrown herself into the midst of the laughing ring of wild beasts.

‘Spare him! spare him for my sake!’ shrieked she.

‘Oh, my pretty lady! you mustn’t interrupt warriors’ sport!’

In an instant she had torn off her shawl, and thrown it over Philammon;
and as she stood, with all the outlines of her beautiful limbs revealed
through the thin robe of spangled gauze--

‘Let the man who dares, touch him beneath that shawl!--though it be a
saffron one!’

The Goths drew back. For Pelagia herself they had as little respect as
the rest of the world had. But for a moment she was not the Messalina of
Alexandria, but a woman; and true to the old woman-worshipping instinct,
they looked one and all at her flashing eyes, full of noble pity and
indignation, as well as of mere woman’s terror--and drew back, and
whispered together.

Whether the good spirit or the evil one would conquer, seemed for a
moment doubtful, when Pelagia felt a heavy hand on her shoulder, and
turning, saw Wulf the son of Ovida.

‘Go back, pretty woman! Men, I claim the boy. Smid, give him to me. He
is your man. You could have killed him if you had chosen, and did not;
and no one else shall.’

‘Give him us, Prince Wulf! We have not seen blood for many a day!’

‘You might have seen rivers of it, if you had had the hearts to go
onward. The boy is mine, and a brave boy. He has upset a warrior fairly
this day, and spared him; and we will make a warrior of him in return.’

And he lifted up the prostrate monk.

‘You are my man now. Do you like fighting?’

Philammon, not understanding the language in which he was addressed,
could only shake his head--though if he had known what its import was,
he could hardly in honesty have said, No.

‘He shakes his head! He does not like it! He is craven! Let us have
him!’

‘I had killed kings when you were shooting frogs,’ cried Smid. ‘Listen
to me, my sons! A coward grips sharply at first, and loosens his hand
after a while, because his blood is soon hot and soon cold. A brave
man’s grip grows the firmer the longer he holds, because the spirit of
Odin comes upon him. I watched the boy’s hands on my threat; and he will
make a man; and I will make him one. However, we may as well make him
useful at once; so give him an oar.’

‘Well,’ answered his new protector, ‘he can as well row us as he rowed
by us; and if we are to go back to a cow’s death and the pool of Hela,
the quicker we go the better.’

And as the men settled themselves again to their oars, one was put into
Philammon’s hand, which he managed with such strength and skill that his
late tormentors, who, in spite of an occasional inclination to robbery
and murder, were thoroughly good-natured, honest fellows, clapped him
on the back, and praised him as heartily as they had just now heartily
intended to torture him to death, and then went forward, as many of them
as were not rowing, to examine the strange beast which they had just
slaughtered, pawing him over from tusks to tail, putting their heads
into his mouth, trying their knives on his hide, comparing him to all
beasts, like and unlike, which they had ever seen, and laughing and
shoving each other about with the fun and childish wonder of a party
of schoolboys; till Smid, who was the wit of the party, settled the
comparative anatomy of the subject for them--‘Valhalla! I’ve found out
what he’s most like!--One of those big blue plums, which gave us all the
stomach-ache when we were encamped in the orchards above Ravenna!’



CHAPTER IV: MIRIAM


One morning in the same week, Hypatia’s favourite maid entered her
chamber with a somewhat terrified face.

‘The old Jewess, madam--the hag who has been watching so often lately
under the wall opposite. She frightened us all out of our senses last
evening by peeping in. We all said she had the evil eye, if any one ever
had--’

‘Well, what of her?’

‘She is below, madam, and will speak with you. Not that I care for her;
I have my amulet on. I hope you have?’

‘Silly girl! Those who have been initiated as I have in the mysteries
of the gods, can defy spirits and command them. Do you suppose that the
favourite of Pallas Athene will condescend to charms and magic? Send her
up.’

The girl retreated, with a look half of awe, half of doubt, at the lofty
pretensions of her mistress, and returned with old Miriam, keeping,
however, prudently behind her, in order to test as little as possible
the power of her own amulet by avoiding the basilisk eye which had
terrified her.

Miriam came in, and advancing to the proud beauty, who remained seated,
made an obeisance down to the very floor, without, however, taking her
eyes for an instant off Hypatia’s face.

Her countenance was haggard and bony, with broad sharp-cut lips, stamped
with a strangely mingled expression of strength and sensuality. Put the
feature about her which instantly fixed Hypatia’s attention, and from
which she could not in spite of herself withdraw it, was the dry,
glittering, coal-black eye which glared out from underneath the gray
fringe of her swarthy brows, between black locks covered with gold
coins. Hypatia could look at nothing but those eyes; and she reddened,
and grew all but unphilosophically angry, as she saw that the old woman
intended her to look at them, and feel the strange power which she
evidently wished them to exercise.

After a moment’s silence, Miriam drew a letter from her bosom, and with
a second low obeisance presented it.

‘From whom is this?’

‘Perhaps the letter itself will tell the beautiful lady, the fortunate
lady, the discerning lady,’ answered she, in a fawning, wheedling tone.
‘How should a poor old Jewess know great folks’ secrets?’

‘Great folks?--’

Hypatia looked at the seal which fixed a silk cord round the letter. It
was Orestes’; and so was the handwriting.... Strange that he should have
chosen such a messenger! What message could it be which required such
secrecy?

She clapped her hands for the maid. ‘Let this woman wait in the
ante-room.’ Miriam glided out backwards, bowing as she went. As Hypatia
looked up over the letter to see whether she was alone, she caught
a last glance of that eye still fixed upon her, and an expression in
Miriam’s face which made her, she knew not why, shudder and turn chill.

‘Foolish that I am! What can that witch be to me? But now for the
letter.’

‘To the most noble and most beautiful, the mistress of philosophy,
beloved of Athene, her pupil and slave sends greeting.’....

‘My slave! and no name mentioned!’

‘There are those who consider that the favourite hen of Honorius, which
bears the name of the Imperial City, would thrive better under a new
feeder; and the Count of Africa has been despatched by himself and by
the immortal gods to superintend for the present the poultry-yard of the
Caesars--at least during the absence of Adolf and Placidia. There are
those also who consider that in his absence the Numidian lion might be
prevailed on to become the yoke-fellow of the Egyptian crocodile; and
a farm which, ploughed by such a pair, should extend from the upper
cataract to the Pillars of Hercules, might have charms even for a
philosopher. But while the ploughman is without a nymph, Arcadia
is imperfect. What were Dionusos without his Ariadne, Ares without
Aphrodite, Zeus without Hera? Even Artemis has her Endymion; Athens
alone remains unwedded; but only because Hephaestus was too rough a
wooer. Such is not he who now offers to the representative of Athene the
opportunity of sharing that which may be with the help of her wisdom,
which without her is impossible. [Greek expression omitted] Shall Eros,
invincible for ages, be balked at last of the noblest game against which
he ever drew his bow?’....

If Hypatia’s colour had faded a moment before under the withering glance
of the old Jewess, it rose again swiftly enough, as she read line after
line of this strange epistle; till at last, crushing it together in her
hand, she rose and hurried into the adjoining library, where Theon sat
over his books.

‘Father, do you know anything of this? Look what Orestes has dared to
send me by the hands of some base Jewish witch!’--And she spread the
letter before him, and stood impatient, her whole figure dilated with
pride and anger, as the old man read it slowly and carefully, and then
looked up, apparently not ill pleased with the contents.

‘What, father?’ asked she, half reproachfully. ‘Do not you, too, feel
the insult which has been put upon your daughter?’

‘My dear child,’ with a puzzled look, ‘do you not see that he offers
you--’

‘I know what he offers me, father. The Empire of Africa.... I am to
descend from the mountain heights of science, from the contemplation
of the unchangeable and ineffable glories, into the foul fields and
farmyards of earthly practical life, and become a drudge among political
chicanery, and the petty ambitions, and sins, and falsehoods of
the earthly herd.... And the price which he offers me--me, the
stainless--me, the virgin--me, the un-tamed,--is-his hand! Pallas
Athene! dost thou not blush with thy child?’

‘But, my child--my child,--an empire--’

‘Would the empire of the world restore my lost self-respect-my just
pride? Would it save my cheek from blushes every time I recollected that
I bore the hateful and degrading name of wife?--The property, the puppet
of a man--submitting to his pleasure--bearing his children--wearing
myself out with all the nauseous cares of wifehood--no longer able to
glory in myself, pure and self-sustained, but forced by day and night
to recollect that my very beauty is no longer the sacrament of Athene’s
love for me, but the plaything of a man;--and such a man as that!
Luxurious, frivolous, heartless--courting my society, as he has done for
years, only to pick up and turn to his own base earthly uses the scraps
which fall from the festal table of the gods! I have encouraged him too
much--vain fool that I have been! No, I wrong myself! It was only--I
thought--I thought that by his being seen at our doors, the cause of
the immortal gods would gain honour and strength in the eyes of the
multitude.... I have tried to feed the altars of heaven with earthly
fuel.... And this is my just reward! I will write to him this
moment,--return by the fitting messenger which he has sent, insult for
insult!’

‘In the name of Heaven, my daughter!--for your father’s sake!--for my
sake! Hypatia!--my pride, my joy, my only hope!--have pity on my gray
hairs!’

And the poor old man flung himself at her feet, and clasped her knees
imploringly.

Tenderly she lifted him up, and wound her long arms round him, and laid
his head on her white shoulder, and her tears fell fast upon his gray
hair; but her lip was firm and determined.

‘Think of my pride--my glory in your glory; think of me.... Not for
myself! You know I never cared for myself!’ sobbed out the old man. ‘But
to die seeing you empress!’

‘Unless I died first in childbed, father, as many a woman dies who
is weak enough to become a slave, and submit to tortures only fit for
slaves.’

‘But--but--said the old man, racking his bewildered brains for some
argument far enough removed from nature and common sense to have an
effect on the beautiful fanatic--‘but the cause of the gods! What you
might do for it!.... Remember Julian!’

Hypatia’s arms dropped suddenly. Yes; it was true! The thought flashed
across her mind with mingled delight and terror.... Visions of her
childhood rose swift and thick--temples--sacrifices--priesthoods--
colleges--museums! What might she not do? What might she not make
Africa? Give her ten years of power, and the hated name of Christian
might be forgotten, and Athene Polias, colossal in ivory and gold,
watching in calm triumph over the harbours of a heathen Alexandria....
But the price!

And she hid her face in her hands, and bursting into bitter tears,
walked slowly away into her own chamber, her whole body convulsed with
the internal struggle.

The old man looked after her, anxiously and perplexed, and then
followed, hesitating. She was sitting at the table, her face buried
in her hands. He did not dare to disturb her. In addition to all the
affection, the wisdom, the glorious beauty, on which his whole heart fed
day by day, he believed her to be the possessor of those supernatural
powers and favours to which she so boldly laid claim. And he stood
watching her in the doorway, praying in his heart to all gods and
demons, principalities and powers, from Athene down to his daughter’s
guardian spirit, to move a determination which he was too weak to
gainsay, and yet too rational to approve.

At last the struggle was over, and she looked up, clear, calm, and
glorious again.

‘It shall be. For the sake of the immortal gods--for the sake of art,
and science, and learning, and philosophy.... It shall be. If the gods
demand a victim, here am I. If a second time in the history of the ages
the Grecian fleet cannot sail forth, conquering and civilising, without
the sacrifice of a virgin, I give my throat to the knife. Father, call
me no more Hypatia: call me Iphigenia!’

‘And me Agamemnon?’ asked the old man, attempting a faint jest through
his tears of joy. ‘I daresay you think me a very cruel father; but--’

‘Spare me, father--I have spared you.’

And she began to write her answer.

‘I have accepted his offer--conditionally, that is. And on whether he
have courage or not to fulfil that condition depends--Do not ask me what
it is. While Cyril is leader of the Christian mob, it may be safer for
you, my father, that you should be able to deny all knowledge of my
answer. Be content. I have said this--that if he will do as I would have
him do, I will do as you would have me do.’

‘Have you not been too rash? Have you not demanded of him something
which, for the sake of public opinion, he dare not grant openly, and yet
which he may allow you to do for yourself when once--’

‘I have. If I am to be a victim, the sacrificing priest shall at least
be a man, and not a coward and a time-server. If he believes this
Christian faith, let him defend it against me; for either it or I shall
perish. If he does not--as he does not--let him give up living in a lie,
and taking on his lips blasphemies against the immortals, from which his
heart and reason revolt!’

And she clapped her hands again for the maid-servant, gave her the
letter silently, shut the doors of her chamber, and tried to resume her
Commentary on Plotinus. Alas! what were all the wire-drawn dreams of
metaphysics to her in that real and human struggle of the heart? What
availed it to define the process by which individual souls emanated
from the universal one, while her own soul had, singly and on its own
responsibility, to decide so terrible an act of will? or to write fine
words with pen and ink about the immutability of the supreme Reason,
while her own reason was left there to struggle for its life amid a
roaring shoreless waste of doubts and darkness? Oh, how grand,
and clear, and logical it had all looked half an hour ago! And how
irrefragably she had been deducing from it all, syllogism after
syllogism, the non-existence of evil!--how it was but a lower form of
good, one of the countless products of the one great all-pervading mind
which could not err or change, only so strange and recondite in its form
as to excite antipathy in all minds but that of the philosopher, who
learnt to see the stem which connected the apparently bitter fruit
with the perfect root from whence it sprang. Could she see the stem
there?--the connection between the pure and supreme Reason, and the
hideous caresses of the debauched and cowardly Orestes? was not that
evil pure, unadulterate with any vein of good, past, present,
or future?...

True;--she might keep her spirit pure amid it all; she might sacrifice
the base body, and ennoble the soul by the self-sacrifice .... And yet,
would not that increase the horror, the agony, the evil of it-to her,
at least, most real evil, not to be explained away-and yet the gods
required it? Were they just, merciful in that? Was it like them, to
torture her, their last unshaken votary? Did they require it? Was it
not required of them by some higher power, of whom they were only the
emanations, the tools, the puppets?--and required of that higher power
by some still higher one--some nameless, absolute destiny of which
Orestes and she, and all heaven and earth, were but the victims, dragged
along in an inevitable vortex, helpless, hopeless, toward that for which
each was meant?--And she was meant for this! The thought was unbearable;
it turned her giddy. No! she would not! She would rebel! Like
Prometheus, she would dare destiny, and brave its worst! And she sprang
up to recall the letter.... Miriam was gone; and she threw herself on
the floor, and wept bitterly.

And her peace of mind would certainly not have been improved, could she
have seen old Miriam hurry home with her letter to a dingy house in the
Jews’ quarter, where it was un-sealed, read, and sealed up again with
such marvellous skill, that no eye could have detected the change; and
finally, still less would she have been comforted could she have heard
the conversation which was going on in a summer-room of Orestes’ palace,
between that illustrious statesman and Raphael Aben-Ezra, who were lying
on two divans opposite each other, whiling away, by a throw or two of
dice, the anxious moments which delayed her answer.

‘Trays again! The devil is in you, Raphael!’

‘I always thought he was,’ answered Raphael, sweeping up the gold
pieces....

‘When will that old witch be back?’

‘When she has read through your letter and Hypatia’s answer.’

‘Read them?’

‘Of course. You don’t fancy she is going to be fool enough to carry a
message without knowing what it is? Don’t be angry; she won’t tell.
She would give one of those two grave-lights there, which she calls her
eyes, to see the thing prosper.’

‘Why?’

‘Your excellency will know when the letter comes. Here she is; I hear
steps in the cloister. Now, one bet before they enter. I give you two to
one she asks you to turn pagan.’

‘What in? Negro-boys?’

‘Anything you like.’

‘Taken. Come in, slaves?’

And Hypocorisma entered, pouting.

‘That Jewish fury is outside with a letter, and has the impudence to say
she won’t let me bring it in!’

‘Bring her in then. Quick!’

‘I wonder what I am here for, if people have secrets that I am not to
know,’ grumbled the spoilt youth.

‘Do you want a blue ribbon round those white sides of yours, you
monkey?’ answered Orestes. ‘Because, if you do, the hippopotamus hide
hangs ready outside.’

‘Let us make him kneel down here for a couple of hours, and use him as a
dice-board,’ said Raphael, ‘as you used to do to the girls in Armenia.’

‘Ah, you recollect that?--and how the barbarian papas used to grumble,
till I had to crucify one or two, eh? That was something like life! I
love those out-of-the-way stations, where nobody asks questions: but
here one might as well live among the monks in Nitria. Here comes
Canidia! Ah, the answer? Hand it here, my queen of go-betweens!’

Orestes read it--and his countenance fell.

‘I have won?’

‘Out of the room, slaves! and no listening!’

‘I have won then?’

Orestes tossed the letter across to him, and Raphael read--

‘The immortal gods accept no divided worship; and he who would command
the counsels of their prophetess must remember that they will vouchsafe
to her no illumination till their lost honours be restored. If he who
aspires to be the lord of Africa dare trample on the hateful cross, and
restore the Caesareum to those for whose worship it was built--if he
dare proclaim aloud with his lips, and in his deeds, that contempt
for novel and barbarous superstitions, which his taste and reason have
already taught him, then he would prove himself one with whom it were a
glory to labour, to dare, to die in a great cause. But till then--’

And so the letter ended.

‘What am I to do?’

‘Take her at her word.’

‘Good heavens! I shall be excommunicated! And--and--what is to become of
my soul?’

‘What will become of it in any case, my most excellent lord?’ answered
Raphael blandly.

‘You mean--I know what you cursed Jews think will happen to every one
but yourselves. But what would the world say? I an apostate! And in the
face of Cyril and the populace! I daren’t, I tell you!’

‘No one asked your excellency to apostatise.’

‘Why, what? What did you say just now?’

‘I asked you to promise. It will not be the first time that promises
before marriage have not exactly coincided with performance afterwards.’

‘I daren’t--that is, I won’t promise. I believe, now, this is some trap
of your Jewish intrigue, just to make me commit myself against those
Christians, whom you hate.’

‘I assure you, I despise all mankind far too profoundly to hate them.
How disinterested my advice was when I proposed this match to you, you
never will know; indeed, it would be boastful in me to tell you. But
really you must make a little sacrifice to win this foolish girl. With
all the depth and daring of her intellect to help you, you might be a
match for Romans, Byzantines, and Goths at once. And as for beauty--why,
there is one dimple inside that wrist, just at the setting on of the
sweet little hand, worth all the other flesh and blood in Alexandria.’

‘By Jove! you admire her so much, I suspect you must be in love with her
yourself. Why don’t you marry her? I’ll make you my prime minister,
and then we shall have the use of her wits without the trouble of her
fancies. By the twelve Gods! If you marry her and help me, I’ll make you
what you like!’

Raphael rose and bowed to the earth.

‘Your serene high-mightiness overwhelms me. But I assure you, that never
having as yet cared for any one’s interest but my own, I could not be
expected, at my time of life, to devote myself to that of another, even
though it were to yours.’

‘Candid!’

‘Exactly so; and moreover, whosoever I may marry, will be practically,
as well as theoretically, my private and peculiar property.... You
comprehend.’

‘Candid again.’

‘Exactly so; and waiving the third argument, that she probably might not
choose to marry me, I beg to remark that it would not be proper to allow
the world to say, that I, the subject, had a wiser and fairer wife than
you, the ruler; especially a wife who bad already refused that ruler’s
complimentary offer.’

‘By Jove! and she has refused me in good earnest! I’ll make her repent
it! I was a fool to ask her at all! What’s the use of having guards, if
one can’t compel what one wants? If fair means can’t do it, foul shall!
I’ll send for her this moment!’

‘Most illustrious majesty--it will not succeed. You do not know that
woman’s determination. Scourges and red-hot pincers will not shake her,
alive; and dead, she will be of no use whatsoever to you, while she will
be of great use to Cyril.’

‘How?’

‘He will be most happy to make the whole story a handle against you,
give out that she died a virgin-martyr, in defence of the most holy
catholic and apostolic faith, get miracles worked at her tomb, and pull
your palace about your ears on the strength thereof.’

‘Cyril will hear of it anyhow: that’s another dilemma into which you
have brought me, you intriguing rascal! Why, this girl will be boasting
all over Alexandria that I have offered her marriage, and that she has
done herself the honour to refuse me!’

‘She will be much too wise to do anything of the kind; she has sense
enough to know that if she did so, you would inform a Christian populace
what conditions she offered you, and, with all her contempt for the
burden of the flesh, she has no mind to be lightened of that pretty load
by being torn in pieces by Christian monks; a very probable ending for
her in any case, as she herself, in her melancholy moods, confesses!’

‘What will you have me do then?’

‘Simply nothing. Let the prophetic spirit go out of her, as it will, in
a day or two, and then--I know nothing of human nature, if she does
not bate a little of her own price. Depend on it, for all her
ineffabilities, and impassibilities, and all the rest of the
seventh-heaven moonshine at which we play here in Alexandria, a throne
is far too pretty a bait for even Hypatia the pythoness to refuse.
Leave well alone is a good rule, but leave ill alone is a better. So
now another bet before we part, and this time three to one. Do nothing
either way, and she sends to you of her own accord before a month is
out. In Caucasian mules? Done? Be it so.’

‘Well, you are the most charming counsellor for a poor perplexed devil
of a prefect! If I had but a private fortune like you, I could just take
the money, and let the work do itself.’

‘Which is the true method of successful government. Your slave bids you
farewell. Do not forget our bet. You dine with me to-morrow?’

And Raphael bowed himself out.

As he left the prefect’s door, he saw Miriam on the opposite side of the
street, evidently watching for him. As soon as she saw him, she held on
her own side, without appearing to notice him, till he turned a corner,
and then crossing, caught him eagerly by the arm.

‘Does the fool dare!’

‘Who dare what?’

‘You know what I mean. Do you suppose old Miriam carries letters without
taking care to know what is inside them? Will he apostatise? Tell me. I
am secret as the grave!’

‘The fool has found an old worm-eaten rag of conscience somewhere in the
corner of his heart, and dare not.’

‘Curse the coward! And such a plot as I had laid! I would have swept
every Christian dog out of Africa within the year. What is the man
afraid of?’

‘Hell-fire.’

‘Why, he will go there in any case, the accursed Gentile!’

‘So I hinted to him, as delicately as I could; but, like the rest of the
world, he had a sort of partiality for getting thither by his own road.’

‘Coward! And whom shall I get now? Oh, if that Pelagia had as much
cunning in her whole body as Hypatia has in her little finger, I’d seat
her and her Goth upon the throne of the Caesars. But--’

‘But she has five senses, and just enough wit to use them, eh?’

‘Don’t laugh at her for that, the darling! I do delight in her, after
all. It warms even my old blood to see how thoroughly she knows her
business, and how she enjoys it, like a true daughter of Eve.’

‘She has been your most successful pupil, certainly, mother. You may
well be proud of her.’

The old hag chuckled to herself a while; and then suddenly turning to
Raphael--‘See here! I have a present for you;’ and she pulled out a
magnificent ring.

‘Why, mother, you are always giving me presents. It was but a month ago
you sent me this poisoned dagger.’

‘Why not, eh?--why not? Why should not Jew give to Jew? Take the old
woman’s ring!’

‘What a glorious opal!’

‘Ah, that is an opal, indeed! And the unspeakable name upon it; just
like Solomon’s own. Take it, I say! Whosoever wears that never need fear
fire, steel, poison, or woman’s eye.’

‘Your own included, eh?’

‘Take it, I say!’ and Miriam caught his hand, and forced the ring on his
finger. ‘There! Now you’re safe. And now call me mother again. I like
it. I don’t know why, but I like it. And--Raphael Aben-Ezra--don’t laugh
at me, and call me witch and hag, as you often do. I don’t care about
it from any one else; I’m accustomed to it. But when you do it, I always
long to stab you. That’s why I gave you the dagger. I used to wear it;
and I was afraid I might be tempted to use it some day, when the thought
came across me how handsome you’d look, and how quiet, when you were
dead, and your soul up there so happy in Abraham’s bosom, watching all
the Gentiles frying and roasting for ever down below. Don’t laugh at me,
I say; and don’t thwart me! I may make you the emperor’s prime minister
some day. I can if I choose.’

‘Heaven forbid!’ said Raphael, laughing.

‘Don’t laugh. I cast your nativity last night, and I know you have no
cause to laugh. A great danger hangs over you, and a deep temptation.
And if you weather this storm, you may be chamberlain, prime minister,
emperor, if you will. And you shall be--by the four archangels, you
shall!’

And the old woman vanished down a by-lane, leaving Raphael utterly
bewildered.

‘Moses and the prophets! Does the old lady intend to marry me? What can
there be in this very lazy and selfish personage who bears my name, to
excite so romantic an affection? Well, Raphael Aben-Ezra, thou hast one
more friend in the world beside Bran the mastiff; and therefore one more
trouble--seeing that friends always expect a due return of affection
and good offices and what not. I wonder whether the old lady has been
getting into a scrape kidnapping, and wants my patronage to help her
out of it.... Three-quarters of a mile of roasting sun between me and
home!.... I must hire a gig, or a litter, or some-thing, off the next
stand .... with a driver who has been eating onions.... and of course
there is not a stand for the next half-mile. Oh, divine aether! as
Prometheus has it, and ye swift-winged breezes (I wish there were any
here), when will it all be over? Three-and-thirty years have I endured
already of this Babel of knaves and fools; and with this abominable good
health of mine, which won’t even help me with gout or indigestion, I am
likely to have three-and-thirty years more of it....I know nothing, and
I care for nothing, and I expect nothing; and I actually can’t take the
trouble to prick a hole in myself, and let the very small amount of
wits out, to see something really worth seeing, and try its strength at
something really worth doing--if, after all, the other side the grave
does not turn out to be just as stupid as this one.... When will it be
all over, and I in Abraham’s bosom--or any one else’s, provided it be
not a woman’s?’



CHAPTER V: A DAY IN ALEXANDRIA


In the meanwhile, Philammon, with his hosts, the Goths, had been
slipping down the stream. Passing, one after another, world-old cities
now dwindled to decaying towns, and numberless canal-mouths, now fast
falling into ruin with the fields to which they ensured fertility,
under the pressure of Roman extortion and misrule, they had entered
one evening the mouth of the great canal of Alexandria, slid easily all
night across the star-bespangled shadows of Lake Mareotis, and found
themselves, when the next morning dawned, among the countless masts and
noisy quays of the greatest seaport in the world. The motley crowd of
foreigners, the hubbub of all dialects from the Crimea to Cadiz, the
vast piles of merchandise, and heaps of wheat, lying unsheltered in that
rainless air, the huge bulk of the corn-ships lading for Rome, whose
tall sides rose story over story, like floating palaces, above the
buildings of some inner dock--these sights, and a hundred more, made the
young monk think that the world did not look at first sight a thing to
be despised. In front of heaps of fruit, fresh from the market-boats,
black groups of glossy negro slaves were basking and laughing on the
quay, looking anxiously and coquettishly round in hopes of a purchaser;
they evidently did not think the change from desert toil to city
luxuries a change for the worse. Philammon turned away his eyes from
beholding vanity; but only to meet fresh vanity wheresoever they fell.
He felt crushed by the multitude of new objects, stunned by the din
around; and scarcely recollected himself enough to seize the first
opportunity of escaping from his dangerous companions.

‘Holloa!’ roared Smid the armourer, as he scrambled on to the steps of
the slip; ‘you are not going to run away without bidding us good-bye?’

‘Stop with me, boy!’ said old Wulf. ‘I saved you; and you are my man.’

Philammon turned and hesitated.

‘I am a monk, and God’s man.’

‘You can be that anywhere. I will make you a warrior.’

‘The weapons of my warfare are not of flesh and blood, but prayer and
fasting,’ answered poor Philammon, who felt already that he should have
ten times more need of the said weapons in Alexandria than ever he had
had in the desert.... ‘Let me go! I am not made for your life! I thank
you, bless you! I will pray for you, sir! but let me go!’

‘Curse the craven hound!’ roared half a dozen voices. ‘Why did you not
let us have our will with him, Prince Wulf? You might have expected such
gratitude from a monk.’

‘He owes me my share of the sport,’ quoth Smid. ‘And here it is!’ And
a hatchet, thrown with practised aim, whistled right for Philammon’s
head--he had just time to swerve, and the weapon struck and snapped
against the granite wall behind.

‘Well saved!’ said Wulf coolly, while the sailors and market-women above
yelled murder, and the custom-house officers, and other constables
and catchpolls of the harbour, rushed to the place--and retired again
quietly at the thunder of the Amal from the boat’s stern--

‘Never mind, my good follows! we’re only Goths; and on a visit to the
prefect, too.’

‘Only Goths, my donkey-riding friends!’ echoed Smid, and at that ominous
name the whole posse comitatus tried to look unconcerned, and found
suddenly that their presence was absolutely required in an opposite
direction.

‘Let him go,’ said Wulf, as he stalked up the steps. ‘Let the boy go.
I never set my heart on any man yet,’ he growled to himself in an under
voice, ‘but what he disappointed me--and I must not expect more from
this fellow. Come, men, ashore, and get drunk!’

Philammon, of course, now that he had leave to go, longed to stay--at
all events, he must go back and thank his hosts. He turned unwillingly
to do so, as hastily as he could, and found Pelagia and her gigantic
lover just entering a palanquin. With downcast eyes he approached the
beautiful basilisk, and stammered out some commonplace; and she, full of
smiles, turned to him at once.

‘Tell us more about yourself before we part. You speak such beautiful
Greek--true Athenian. It is quite delightful to hear one’s own accent
again. Were you ever at Athens?’

‘When I was a child; I recollect--that is, I think--’

‘What?’ asked Pelagia eagerly.

‘A great house in Athens--and a great battle there--and coming to Egypt
in a ship.’

‘Heavens!’ said Pelagia, and paused.... ‘How strange! Girls, who said he
was like me?’

‘I’m sure we meant no harm, if we did say it in a joke,’ pouted one of
the attendants.

‘Like me!--you must come and see us. I have something to say to you ....
You must!’

Philammon misinterpreted the intense interest of her tone, and if he did
not shrink back, gave some involuntary gesture of reluctance. Pelagia
laughed aloud.

‘Don’t be vain enough to suspect, foolish boy, but come! Do you think
that I have nothing to talk about but nonsense? Come and see me. It
may be better for you. I live in--’ and she named a fashionable street,
which Philammon, though he inwardly vowed not to accept the invitation,
somehow could not help remembering.

‘Do leave the wild man, and come,’ growled the Amal from within the
palanquin. ‘You are not going to turn nun, I hope?’

‘Not while the first man I ever met in the world stays in it,’ answered
Pelagia, as she skipped into the palanquin, taking care to show the most
lovely white heel and ankle, and, like the Parthian, send a random
arrow as she retreated. But the dart was lost on Philammon, who had been
already hustled away by the bevy of laughing attendants, amid baskets,
dressing-cases, and bird-cages, and was fain to make his escape into the
Babel round, and inquire his way to the patriarch’s house.

‘Patriarch’s house?’ answered the man whom he first addressed, a little
lean, swarthy fellow, with merry black eyes, who, with a basket of fruit
at his feet, was sunning himself on a baulk of timber, meditatively
chewing the papyrus-cane, and examining the strangers with a look of
absurd sagacity. ‘I know it; without a doubt I know it; all Alexandria
has good reason to know it. Are you a monk?’

‘Yes.’

‘Then ask your way of the monks; you won’t go far without finding one.’

‘But I do not even know the right direction; what is your grudge against
monks, my good man?’

‘Look here, my youth; you seem too ingenuous for a monk. Don’t flatter
yourself that it will last. If you can wear the sheepskin, and haunt
the churches here for a month, without learning to lie, and slander, and
clap, and hoot, and perhaps play your part in a sedition--and--murder
satyric drama--why, you are a better man than I take you for. I, sir, am
a Greek and a philosopher; though the whirlpool of matter may have,
and indeed has, involved my ethereal spark in the body of a porter.
Therefore, youth,’ continued the little man, starting up upon his baulk
like an excited monkey, and stretching out one oratorio paw, ‘I bear a
treble hatred to the monkish tribe. First, as a man and a husband;....
for as for the smiles of beauty, or otherwise,--such as I have, I have;
and the monks, if they had their wicked will, would leave neither men
nor women in the world. Sir, they would exterminate the human race in a
single generation, by a voluntary suicide! Secondly, as a porter; for
if all men turned monks, nobody would be idle, and the profession of
portering would be annihilated. Thirdly, sir, as a philosopher; for as
the false coin is odious to the true, so is the irrational and animal
asceticism of the monk, to the logical and methodic self-restraint of
one who, like your humblest of philosophers, aspires to a life according
to the pure reason.’

‘And pray,’ asked Philammon, half laughing, ‘who has been your tutor in
philosophy?’

‘The fountain of classic wisdom, Hypatia herself. As the ancient
sage--the name is unimportant to a monk--pumped water nightly that he
might study by day, so I, the guardian of cloaks and parasols, at the
sacred doors of her lecture-room, imbibe celestial knowledge. From my
youth I felt in me a soul above the matter-entangled herd. She revealed
to me the glorious fact, that I am a spark of Divinity itself. A fallen
star, I am, sir!’ continued he, pensively, stroking his lean stomach--‘a
fallen star!--fallen, if the dignity of philosophy will allow of
the simile, among the hogs of the lower world--indeed, even into the
hog-bucket itself. Well, after all, I will show you the way to the
Archbishop’s. There is a philosophic pleasure in opening one’s treasures
to the modest young. Perhaps you will assist me by carrying this basket
of fruit?’ And the little man jumped up, put his basket on Philammon’s
head, and trotted off up a neighbouring street.

Philammon followed, half contemptuous, half wondering at what this
philosophy might be, which could feed the self-conceit of anything so
abject as his ragged little apish guide; but the novel roar and whirl of
the street, the perpetual stream of busy faces, the line of curricles,
palanquins, laden asses, camels, elephants, which met and passed him,
and squeezed him up steps and into doorways, as they threaded their
way through the great Moon-gate into the ample street beyond, drove
everything from his mind but wondering curiosity, and a vague, helpless
dread of that great living wilderness, more terrible than any dead
wilderness of sand which he had left behind. Already he longed for the
repose, the silence of the Laura--for faces which knew him and smiled
upon him; but it was too late to turn back ow. His guide held on for
more than a mile up the great main street, crossed in the centre of the
city, at right angles, by one equally magnificent, at each end of which,
miles away, appeared, dim and distant over the heads of the living
stream of passengers, the yellow sand-hills of the desert; while at the
end of the vista in front of them gleamed the blue harbour, through a
network of countless masts.

At last they reached the quay at the opposite end of the street; and
there burst on Philammon’s astonished eyes a vast semicircle of blue
sea, ringed with palaces and towers....He stopped involuntarily; and
his little guide stopped also, and looked askance at the young monk, to
watch the effect which that grand panorama should produce on him.

‘There!--Behold our works! Us Greeks!--us benighted heathens! Look at it
and feel yourself what you are, a very small, conceited, ignorant young
person, who fancies that your new religion gives you a right to despise
every one else. Did Christians make all this? Did Christians build that
Pharos there on the left horn--wonder of the world? Did Christians
raise that mile-long mole which runs towards the land, with its two
drawbridges, connecting the two ports? Did Christians build this
esplanade, or this gate of the Sun above our heads? Or that Caesareum
on our right here? Look at those obelisks before it!’ And he pointed
upwards to those two world-famous ones, one of which still lies on its
ancient site, as Cleopatra’s Needle. ‘Look up! look up, I say, and feel
small--very small indeed! Did Christians raise them, or engrave them
from base to point with the wisdom of the ancients? Did Christians build
that Museum next to it, or design its statues and its frescoes--now,
alas! re-echoing no more to the hummings of the Attic bee? Did they pile
up out of the waves that palace beyond it, or that Exchange? or fill
that Temple of Neptune with breathing brass and blushing marble? Did
they build that Timonium on the point, where Antony, worsted at Actium,
forgot his shame in Cleopatra’s arms? Did they quarry out that island of
Antirrhodus into a nest of docks, or cover those waters with the sails
of every nation under heaven? Speak! Thou son of bats and moles--thou
six feet of sand--thou mummy out of the cliff caverns! Can monks do
works like these?’

‘Other men have laboured, and we have entered into their labours,’
answered Philammon, trying to seem as unconcerned as he could. He was,
indeed, too utterly astonished to be angry at anything. The overwhelming
vastness, multiplicity, and magnificence of the whole scene; the range
of buildings, such as mother earth never, perhaps, carried on her lap
before or since, the extraordinary variety of form-the pure Doric and
Ionic of the earlier Ptolemies, the barbaric and confused gorgeousness
of the later Roman, and here and there an imitation of the grand
elephantine style of old Egypt, its gaudy colours relieving, while they
deepened, the effect of its massive and simple outlines; the eternal
repose of that great belt of stone contrasting with the restless ripple
of the glittering harbour, and the busy sails which crowded out into
the sea beyond, like white doves taking their flight into boundless
space?--all dazzled, overpowered, saddened him.... This was the
world.... Was it not beautiful?.... Must not the men who made all this
have been--if not great.... yet.... he knew not what? Surely they had
great souls and noble thoughts in them! Surely there was something
godlike in being able to create such things! Not for themselves alone,
too; but for a nation--for generations yet unborn.... And there was the
sea.... and beyond it, nations of men innumerable .... His imagination
was dizzy with thinking of them. Were they all doomed--lost?.... Had God
no love for them?

At last, recovering himself, he recollected his errand, and again asked
his way to the archbishop’s house.

‘This way, O youthful nonentity!’ answered the little man, leading the
way round the great front of the Caesareum, at the foot of the obelisks.

Philammon’s eye fell on some new masonry in the pediment, ornamented
with Christian symbols.

‘How? Is this a church?’

‘It is the Caesareum. It has become temporarily a church. The immortal
gods have, for the time being, condescended to waive their rights; but
it is the Caesareum, nevertheless. This way; down this street to the
right. There,’ said he, pointing to a doorway in the side of the Museum,
‘is the last haunt of the Muses--the lecture-room of Hypatia, the school
of my unworthiness. And here,’ stopping at the door of a splendid house
on the opposite side of the street, ‘is the residence of that blest
favourite of Athene--Neith, as the barbarians of Egypt would denominate
the goddess--we men of Macedonia retain the time-honoured Grecian
nomenclature.... You may put down your basket.’ And he knocked at
the door, and delivering the fruit to a black porter, made a polite
obeisance to Philammon, and seemed on the point of taking his departure.

‘But where is the archbishop’s house?’

‘Close to the Serapeium. You cannot miss the place: four hundred columns
of marble, now ruined by Christian persecutors, stand on an eminence--’

‘But how far off?’

‘About three miles; near the gate of the Moon.’

‘Why, was not that the gate by which we entered the city on the other
side?’

‘Exactly so; you will know your way back, having already traversed it.’

Philammon checked a decidedly carnal inclination to seize the little
fellow by the throat, and knock his head against the wall, and contented
himself by saying--

‘Then do you actually mean to say, you heathen villain, that you have
taken me six or seven miles out of my road?’

‘Good words young man. If you do me harm, I call for help; we are close
to the Jews’ quarter, and there are some thousands there who will swarm
out like wasps on the chance of beating a monk to death. Yet that which
I have done, I have done with a good purpose. First, politically, or
according to practical wisdom--in order that you, not I, might carry
the basket. Next, philosophically, or according to the intuitions of the
pure reason--in order that you might, by beholding the magnificence of
that great civilisation which your fellows wish to destroy, learn
that you are an ass, and a tortoise, and a nonentity, and so beholding
yourself to be nothing, may be moved to become something.’

And he moved off.

Philammon seized him by the collar of his ragged tunic, and held him in
a gripe from which the little man, though he twisted like an eel could
not escape.

‘Peaceably, if you will; if not, by main force. You shall go back with
me, and show me every step of the way. It is a just penalty.’

‘The philosopher conquers circumstances by submitting to them. I go
peaceably. Indeed, the base necessities of the hog-bucket side of
existence compel me of themselves back to the Moon-gate, for another
early fruit job.’

So they went back together.

Now why Philammon’s thoughts should have been running on the next new
specimen of womankind to whom he had been introduced, though only in
name, let psychologists tell, but certainly, after he had walked some
half-mile in silence, he suddenly woke up, as out of many meditations,
and asked--

‘But who is this Hypatia, of whom you talk so much?’

‘Who is Hypatia, rustic? The queen of Alexandria! In wit, Athene; Hera
in majesty; in beauty, Aphrodite!’

‘And who are they?’ asked Philammon.

The porter stopped, surveyed him slowly from foot to head with an
expression of boundless pity and contempt, and was in the act of walking
off in the ecstasy of his disdain, when he was brought to suddenly by
Philammon’s strong arm.

‘Ah!--I recollect. There is a compact.... Who is Athene? The goddess,
giver of wisdom. Hera, spouse of Zeus, queen of the Celestials.
Aphrodite, mother of love.... You are not expected to understand.’

Philammon did understand, however, so much as this, that Hypatia was a
very unique and wonderful person in the mind of his little guide; and
therefore asked the only further question by which he could as yet test
any Alexandrian phenomenon--

‘And is she a friend of the patriarch?’

The porter opened his eyes very wide, put his middle finger in a
careful and complicated fashion between his fore and third fingers, and
extending it playfully towards Philammon, performed therewith certain
mysterious signals, the effect whereof being totally lost on him, the
little man stopped, took another look at Philammon’s stately figure, and
answered--

‘Of the human race in general, my young friend. The philosopher must
rise above the individual, to the contemplation of the universal....
Aha!-Here is something worth seeing, and the gates are open.’ And he
stopped at the portal of a vast building.

‘Is this the patriarch’s house?’

‘The patriarch’s tastes are more plebeian. He lives, they say, in two
dirty little rooms--knowing what is fit for him. The patriarch’s house?
Its antipodes, my young friend--that is, if such beings have a cosmic
existence, on which point Hypatia has her doubts. This is the temple of
art and beauty; the Delphic tripod of poetic inspiration; the solace of
the earthworn drudge; in a word, the theatre; which your patriarch, if
he could, would convert to-morrow into a--but the philosopher must not
revile. Ah! I see the prefect’s apparitors at the gate. He is making the
polity, as we call it here; the dispositions; settling, in short,
the bill of fare for the day, in compliance with the public palate. A
facetious pantomime dances here on this day every week--admired by
some, the Jews especially. To the more classic taste, many of his
movements--his recoil, especially--are wanting in the true antique
severity--might be called, perhaps, on the whole, indecent. Still the
weary pilgrim must be amused. Let us step in and hear.’

But before Philammon could refuse, an uproar arose within, a rush
outward of the mob, and inward of the prefect’s apparitors.

‘It is false!’ shouted many voices. ‘A Jewish calumny! The man is
innocent!’

‘There is no more sedition in him than there is in me,’ roared a fat
butcher, who looked as ready to fell a man as an ox. ‘He was always the
first and the last to clap the holy patriarch at sermon.’

‘Dear tender soul,’ whimpered a woman; ‘and I said to him only this
morning, why don’t you flog my boys, Master Hierax? how can you expect
them to learn if they are not flogged? And he said, he never could abide
the sight of a rod, it made his back tingle so.’

‘Which was plainly a prophecy!’

‘And proves him innocent; for how could he prophesy if he was not one of
the holy ones?’

‘Monks, to the rescue! Hierax, a Christian, is taken and tortured in the
theatre!’ thundered a wild hermit, his beard and hair streaming about
his chest and shoulders.

‘Nitria! Nitria! For God and the mother of God, monks of Nitria! Down
with the Jewish slanderers! Down with heathen tyrants!’--And the mob,
reinforced as if by magic by hundreds from without, swept down the huge
vaulted passage, carrying Philammon and the porter with them.

‘My friends,’ quoth the little man, trying to look philosophically calm,
though he was fairly off his legs, and hanging between heaven and earth
on the elbows of the bystanders, ‘whence this tumult?’

‘The Jews got up a cry that Hierax wanted to raise a riot. Curse them
and their sabbath, they are always rioting on Saturdays about this
dancer of theirs, instead of working like honest Christians!’

‘And rioting on Sunday instead. Ahem! sectarian differences, which the
philosopher--

The rest of the sentence disappeared with the speaker, as a sudden
opening of the mob let him drop, and buried him under innumerable legs.

Philammon, furious at the notion of persecution, maddened by the cries
around him, found himself bursting fiercely through the crowd, till he
reached the front ranks, where tall gates of open ironwork barred all
farther progress, but left a full view of the tragedy which was enacting
within, where the poor innocent wretch, suspended from a gibbet, writhed
and shrieked at every stroke of the hide whips of his tormentors.

In vain Philammon and the monks around him knocked and beat at
the gates; they were only answered by laughter and taunts from the
apparitors within, curses on the turbulent mob of Alexandria, with its
patriarch, clergy, saints, and churches, and promises to each and all
outside, that their turn would come next; while the piteous screams grew
fainter and more faint, and at last, with a convulsive shudder, motion
and suffering ceased for ever in the poor mangled body.

‘They have killed him! Martyred him! Back to the archbishop! To the
patriarch’s house: he will avenge us!’ And as the horrible news, and
the watchword which followed it, passed outwards through the crowd, they
wheeled round as one man, and poured through street after street towards
Cyril’s house; while Philammon, beside himself with horror, rage, and
pity, hurried onward with them.

A tumultuous hour, or more, was passed in the street before he could
gain entrance; and then he was swept, along with the mob in which he had
been fast wedged, through a dark low passage, and landed breathless in
a quadrangle of mean and new buildings, overhung by the four hundred
stately columns of the ruined Serapeium. The grass was already
growing on the ruined capitals and architraves.... Little did even its
destroyers dream then, that the day would come when one only of that
four hundred would be left, as ‘Pompey’s Pillar,’ to show what the men
of old could think and do.

Philammon at last escaped from the crowd, and putting the letter which
he had carried in his bosom into the hands of one of the priests who
was mixing with the mob, was beckoned by him into a corridor, and up a
flight of stairs, and into a large, low, mean room, and there, by virtue
of the world-wide freemasonry which Christianity had, for the first
time on earth, established, found himself in five minutes awaiting the
summons of the most powerful man south of the Mediterranean.

A curtain hung across the door of the inner chamber, through which
Philammon could hear plainly the steps of some one walking up and down
hurriedly and fiercely.

‘They will drive me to it!’ at last burst out a deep sonorous voice.
‘They will drive me to it.... Their blood be on their own head! It
is not enough for them to blaspheme God and His church, to have the
monopoly of all the cheating, fortune-telling, usury, sorcery, and
coining of the city, but they must deliver my clergy into the hands of
the tyrant?’

‘It was so even in the apostles’ time,’ suggested a softer but far more
unpleasant voice.

‘Then it shall be so no longer! God has given me the power to stop
them; and God do so to me, and more also, if I do not use that power.
To-morrow I sweep out this Augean stable of villainy, and leave not a
Jew to blaspheme and cheat in Alexandria.’

‘I am afraid such a judgment, however righteous, might offend his
excellency.’

‘His excellency! His tyranny! Why does Orestes truckle to these
circumcised, but because they lend money to him and to his creatures? He
would keep up a den of fiends in Alexandria if they would do as much for
him! And then to play them off against me and mine, to bring religion
into contempt by setting the mob together by the ears, and to end with
outrages like this! Seditious! Have they not cause enough? The sooner
I remove one of their temptations the better: let the other tempter
beware, lest his judgment be at hand!’

‘The prefect, your holiness?’ asked the other voice slily.

‘Who spoke of the prefect? Whosoever is a tyrant, and a murderer, and an
oppressor of the poor, and a favourer of the philosophy which despises
and enslaves the poor, should not he perish, though he be seven times a
prefect?’

At this juncture Philammon, thinking perhaps that he had already heard
too much, notified his presence by some slight noise, at which the
secretary, as he seemed to be, hastily lifted the curtain, and somewhat
sharply demanded his business. The names of Pambo and Arsenius, however,
seemed to pacify him at once; and the trembling youth was ushered into
the presence of him who in reality, though not in name, sat on the
throne of the Pharaohs.

Not, indeed, in their outward pomp; the furniture of the chamber was
but a grade above that of the artisan’s; the dress of the great man was
coarse and simple; if personal vanity peeped out anywhere, it was in
the careful arrangement of the bushy beard, and of the few curling locks
which the tonsure had spared. But the height and majesty of his figure,
the stern and massive beauty of his features, the flashing eye, curling
lip, and projecting brow--all marked him as one born to command. As the
youth entered, Cyril stopped short in his walk, and looking him through
and through, with a glance which burnt upon his cheeks like fire, and
made him all but wish the kindly earth would open and hide him, took the
letters, read them, and then began--

‘Philammon. A Greek. You are said to have learned to obey. If so you
have also learned to rule. Your father-abbot has transferred you to my
tutelage. You are now to obey me.’

‘And I will.’

‘Well said. Go to that window, then, and leap into the court.’

Philammon walked to it, and opened it. The pavement was fully twenty
feet below; but his business was to obey, and not take measurements.
There was a flower in the vase upon the sill. He quietly removed it,
and in an instant more would have leapt for life or death, when Cyril’s
voice thundered ‘Stop!’

‘The lad will pass, my Peter. I shall not be afraid now for the secrets
which he may have overheard.’

Peter smiled assent, looking all the while as if he thought it a great
pity that the young man had not been allowed to put talebearing out of
his own power by breaking his neck.

‘You wish to see the world. Perhaps you have seen something of it
to-day.’

‘I saw the murder--’

‘Then you saw what you came hither to see; what the world is, and what
justice and mercy it can deal out. You would not dislike to see God’s
reprisals to man’s tyranny?.... Or to be a fellow-worker with God
therein, if I judge rightly by your looks?’

‘I would avenge that man.’

‘Ah! my poor simple schoolmaster! And his fate is the portent of
portents to you now! Stay awhile, till you have gone with Ezekiel into
the inner chambers of the devil’s temple, and you will see worse
things than these--women weeping for Thammuz; bemoaning the decay of an
idolatry which they themselves disbelieve--That, too, is on the list of
Hercules’ labour, Peter mine.’

At this moment a deacon entered.... ‘Your holiness, the rabbis of the
accursed nation are below, at your summons. We brought them in through
the back gate, for fear of--’

‘Right, right. An accident to them might have ruined us. I shall not
forget you. Bring them up. Peter, take this youth, introduce him to the
parabolani.... Who will be the best man for him to work under?’

‘The brother Theopompus is especially sober and gentle.’

Cyril shook his head laughingly.... ‘Go into the next room, my son ....
No, Peter, put him under some fiery saint, some true Boanerges, who will
talk him down, and work him to death, and show him the best and worst
of everything. Cleitophon will be the man. Now then, let me see my
engagements; five minutes for these Jews--Orestes did not choose to
frighten them: let us see whether Cyril cannot; then an hour to look
over the hospital accounts; an hour for the schools; a half-hour for the
reserved cases of distress; and another half-hour for myself; and then
divine service. See that the boy is there. Do bring in every one in
their turn, Peter mine. So much time goes in hunting for this man and
that man.... and life is too short for all that. Where are these Jews?’
and Cyril plunged into the latter half of his day’s work with that
untiring energy, self-sacrifice, and method, which commanded for him,
in spite of all suspicions of his violence, ambition, and intrigue,
the loving awe and implicit obedience of several hundred thousand human
beings.

So Philammon went out with the parabolani, a sort of organised guild
of district visitors.... And in their company he saw that afternoon
the dark side of that world, whereof the harbour-panorama had been the
bright one. In squalid misery, filth, profligacy, ignorance,
ferocity, discontent, neglected in body, house, and soul, by the civil
authorities, proving their existence only in aimless and sanguinary
riots, there they starved and rotted, heap on heap, the masses of the
old Greek population, close to the great food-exporting harbour of the
world. Among these, fiercely perhaps, and fanatically, but still among
them and for them, laboured those district visitors night and day. And
so Philammon toiled away with them, carrying food and clothing, helping
sick to the hospital, and dead to the burial; cleaning out the infected
houses--for the fever was all but perennial in those quarters--and
comforting the dying with the good news of forgiveness from above; till
the larger number had to return to evening service. He, however, was
kept by his superior, watching at a sick-bedside, and it was late at
night before he got home, and was reported to Peter the Reader as having
acquitted himself like ‘a man of God,’ as, indeed, without the least
thought of doing anything noble or self-sacrificing, he had truly done,
being a monk. And so he threw himself on a truckle-bed, in one of the
many cells which opened off a long corridor, and fell fast asleep in a
minute.

He was just weltering about in a dreary dream-jumble of Goths dancing
with district visitors, Pelagia as an angel, with peacock’s wings;
Hypatia with horns and cloven feet, riding three hippopotami at
once round the theatre; Cyril standing at an open window, cursing
frightfully, and pelting him with flower-pots; and a similar self-sown
after-crop of his day’s impressions; when he was awakened by the tramp
of hurried feet in the street outside, and shouts, which gradually, as
he became conscious, shaped themselves into cries of ‘Alexander’s Church
is on fire! Help, good Christians! Fire! Help!’

Whereat he sat up in his truckle-bed, tried to recollect where he was,
and having with some trouble succeeded, threw on his sheepskin, and
jumped up to ask the news from the deacons and monks who were hurrying
along the corridor outside.... ‘Yes, Alexander’s church was on fire;’
and down the stairs they poured, across the courtyard, and out into the
street, Peter’s tall figure serving as a standard and a rallying point.

As they rushed out through the gateway, Philammon, dazzled by the sudden
transition from the darkness within to the blaze of moon and starlight
which flooded the street, and walls, and shining roofs, hung back a
moment. That hesitation probably saved his life; for in an instant he
saw a dark figure spring out of the shadow, a long knife flashed across
his eyes, and a priest next to him sank upon the pavement with a groan,
while the assassin dashed off down the street, hotly pursued by monks
and parabolani.

Philammon, who ran like a desert ostrich, had soon outstripped all but
Peter, when several more dark figures sprang out of doorways and corners
and joined, or seem to join, the pursuit. Suddenly, however, after
running a hundred yards, they drew up opposite the mouth of a side
street; the assassin stopped also. Peter, suspecting something wrong,
slackened his pace, and caught Philammon’s arm.

‘Do you see those fellows in the shadow?’

But, before Philammon could answer, some thirty or forty men, their
daggers gleaming in the moonlight, moved out into the middle of the
street, and received the fugitives into their ranks. What was the
meaning of it? Here was a pleasant taste of the ways of the most
Christian and civilised city of the Empire!

‘Well,’ thought Philammon, ‘I have come out to see the world, and I
seem, at this rate, to be likely to see enough of it.’

Peter turned at once, and fled as quickly as he had pursued; while
Philammon, considering discretion the better part of valour, followed,
and they rejoined their party breathless.

‘There is an armed mob at the end of the street.’

‘Assassins!’ ‘Jews!’ ‘A conspiracy!’ Up rose a Babel of doubtful voices.
The foe appeared in sight, advancing stealthily, and the whole party
took to flight, led once more by Peter, who seemed determined to make
free use, in behalf of his own safety, of the long legs which nature had
given him.

Philammon followed, sulkily and unwillingly, at a foot’s pace; but he
had not gone a dozen yards when a pitiable voice at his feet called to
him--

‘Help! mercy! Do not leave me here to be murdered! I am a Christian;
indeed I am a Christian!’

Philammon stooped, and lifted from the ground a comely negro-woman,
weeping, and shivering in a few tattered remnants of clothing.

‘I ran out when they said the church was on fire,’ sobbed the poor
creature, ‘and the Jews beat and wounded me. They tore my shawl and
tunic off me before I could get away from them; and then our own people
ran over me and trod me down. And now my husband will beat me, if I ever
get home. Quick! up this side street, or we shall be murdered!’

The armed men, whosoever they were, were close on them. There was no
time to be lost; and Philammon, assuring her that he would not desert
her, hurried her up the side street which she pointed out. But the
pursuers had caught sight of them, and while the mass held on up the
main sight, three or four turned aside and gave chase. The poor negress
could only limp along, and Philammon, unarmed, looked back, and saw the
bright steel points gleaming in the moonlight, and made up his mind to
die as a monk should. Nevertheless, youth is hopeful. One chance for
life. He thrust the negress into a dark doorway, where her colour hid
her well enough, and had just time to ensconce himself behind a pillar,
when the foremost pursuer reached him. He held his breath in fearful
suspense. Should he be seen? He would not die without a struggle at
least. No! the fellow ran on, panting. But in a minute more, another
came up, saw him suddenly, and sprang aside startled. That start saved
Philammon. Quick as a cat, he leapt upon him, felled him to the earth
with a single blow, tore the dagger from his hand, and sprang to his
feet again just in time to strike his new weapon full into the third
pursuer’s face. The man put his hand to his head, and recoiled against
a fellow-ruffian, who was close on his heels. Philammon, flushed with
victory, took advantage of the confusion, and before the worthy pair
could recover, dealt them half a dozen blows which, luckily for them,
came from an unpractised hand, or the young monk might have had more
than one life to answer for. As it was, they turned and limped off,
cursing in an unknown tongue; and Philammon found himself triumphant
and alone, with the trembling negress and the prostrate ruffian, who,
stunned by the blow and the fall, lay groaning on the pavement.

It was all over in a minute.... The negress was kneeling under the
gateway, pouring out her simple thanks to Heaven for this unexpected
deliverance; and Philammon was about to kneel too, when a thought struck
him; and coolly despoiling the Jew of his shawl and sash, he handed them
over to the poor negress, considering them fairly enough as his own by
right of conquest; but, lo and behold! as she was overwhelming him with
thanks, a fresh mob poured into the street from the upper end, and
were close on them before they were aware .... A flush of terror and
despair,.... and then a burst of joy, as, by mingled moonlight and
torchlight, Philammon descried priestly robes, and in the forefront of
the battle--there being no apparent danger--Peter the Reader, who
seemed to be anxious to prevent inquiry, by beginning to talk as fast as
possible.

‘Ah, boy! Safe? The saints be praised! We gave you up for dead! Whom
have you here? A prisoner? And we have another. He ran right into our
arms up the street, and the Lord delivered him into our hand. He must
have passed you.’

‘So he did,’ said Philammon, dragging up his captive, ‘and here is his
fellow-scoundrel.’ Whereon the two worthies were speedily tied
together by the elbows; and the party marched on once more in search of
Alexander’s church, and the supposed conflagration.

Philammon looked round for the negress, but she had vanished. He was far
too much ashamed of being known to have been alone with a woman to say
anything about her. Yet he longed to see her again; an interest--even
something like an affection--had already sprung up in his heart toward
the poor simple creature whom he had delivered from death. Instead of
thinking her ungrateful for not staying to tell what he had done
for her, he was thankful to her for having saved his blushes, by
disappearing so opportunely.... And he longed to tell her so--to know
if she was hurt--to--Oh, Philammon! only four days from the Laura, and
a whole regiment of women acquaintances already! True, Providence having
sent into the world about as many women as men, it maybe difficult to
keep out of their way altogether. Perhaps, too, Providence may have
intended them to be of some use to that other sex, with whom it has so
mixed them up. Don’t argue, poor Philammon; Alexander’s church is on
fire!-forward!

And so they hurried on, a confused mass of monks and populace, with
their hapless prisoners in the centre, who, hauled, cuffed, questioned,
and cursed by twenty self-elected inquisitors at once, thought fit,
either from Jewish obstinacy or sheer bewilderment, to give no account
whatsoever of themselves.

As they turned the corner of a street, the folding-doors of a large
gateway rolled open; a long line of glittering figures poured across the
road, dropped their spear-butts on the pavement with a single rattle,
and remained motionless. The front rank of the mob recoiled; and an
awe-struck whisper ran through them.... ‘The Stationaries!’

‘Who are they?’ asked Philammon in a whisper.

‘The soldiers--the Roman soldiers,’ answered a whisperer to him.

Philammon, who was among the leaders, had recoiled too--he hardly knew
why--at that stern apparition. His next instinct was to press forward as
close as he dared.... And these were Roman soldiers!--the conquerors of
the world!--the men whose name had thrilled him from his childhood
with vague awe and admiration, dimly heard of up there in the lonely
Laura.... Roman soldiers! And here he was face to face with them at
last!

His curiosity received a sudden check, however, as he found his arm
seized by an officer, as he took him to be, from the gold ornaments on
his helmet and cuirass, who lifted his vine-stock threateningly over the
young monk’s head, and demanded--

‘What’s all this about? Why are you not quietly in your beds, you
Alexandrian rascals?’

‘Alexander’s church is on fire,’ answered Philammon, thinking the
shortest answer the wisest.

‘So much the better.’

‘And the Jews are murdering the Christians.’

‘Fight it out, then. Turn in, men, it’s only a riot.’

And the steel-clad apparition suddenly flashed round, and vanished,
trampling and jingling, into the dark jaws of the guardhouse-gate, while
the stream, its temporary barrier removed, rushed on wilder than ever.

Philammon hurried on too with them, not without a strange feeling of
disappointment. ‘Only a riot!’ Peter was chuckling to his brothers
over their cleverness in ‘having kept the prisoners in the middle, and
stopped the rascals’ mouths till they were past the guard-house.’ ‘A
fine thing to boast of,’ thought Philammon, ‘in the face of the men who
make and unmake kings and Caesars!’ ‘Only a riot!’ He, and the corps of
district visitors--whom he fancied the most august body on earth--and
Alexander’s church, Christians murdered by Jews, persecution of the
Catholic faith, and all the rest of it, was simply, then, not worth the
notice of those forty men, alone and secure in the sense of power and
discipline, among tens of thousands .... He hated them, those soldiers.
Was it because they were indifferent to the cause of which he was
inclined to think himself a not unimportant member, on the strength of
his late Samsonic defeat of Jewish persecutors? At least, he obeyed the
little porter’s advice, and ‘felt very small indeed.’

And he felt smaller still, being young and alive to ridicule, when,
at some sudden ebb or flow, wave or wavelet of the Babel sea, which
weltered up and down every street, a shrill female voice informed them
from an upper window, that Alexander’s church was not on fire at all;
that she had gone to the top of the house, as they might have gone, if
they had not been fools, etc. etc.; and that it ‘looked as safe and
as ugly as ever’; wherewith a brickbat or two having been sent up in
answer, she shut the blinds, leaving them to halt, inquire, discover
gradually and piecemeal, after the method of mobs, they had been
following the nature of mobs; that no one had seen the church on fire,
or seen any one else who had seen the same, or even seen any light in
the sky in any quarter, or knew who raised the cry; or--or--in short,
Alexander’s church was two miles off; if it was on fire, it was either
burnt down or saved by this time; if not, the night-air was, to say
the least, chilly: and, whether it was or not, there were ambuscades
of Jews--Satan only knew how strong--in every street between them and
it.... Might it not be better to secure their two prisoners, and then
ask for further orders from the archbishop? Wherewith, after the manner
of mobs, they melted off the way they came, by twos and threes, till
those of a contrary opinion began to find themselves left alone, and
having a strong dislike to Jewish daggers, were fain to follow the
stream.

With a panic or two, a cry of ‘The Jews are on us!’ and a general rush
in every direction (in which one or two, seeking shelter from the
awful nothing in neighbouring houses, were handed over to the watch
as burglars, and sent to the quarries accordingly), they reached the
Serapeium, and there found, of course, a counter-mob collected to inform
them that they had been taken in--that Alexander’s church had never
been on fire at all--that the Jews had murdered a thousand Christians
at least, though three dead bodies, including the poor priest who lay
in the house within, were all of the thousand who had yet been seen--and
that the whole Jews’ quarter was marching upon them. At which news
it was considered advisable to retreat into the archbishop’s house as
quickly as possible, barricade the doors, and prepare for a siege--a
work at which Philammon performed prodigies, tearing woodwork from the
rooms, and stones from the parapets, before it struck some of the
more sober-minded that it was as well to wait for some more decided
demonstration of attack, before incurring so heavy a carpenter’s bill of
repairs.

At last the heavy tramp of footsteps was heard coming down the street,
and every window was crowded in an instant with eager heads; while Peter
rushed downstairs to heat the large coppers, having some experience in
the defensive virtues of boiling water. The bright moon glittered on a
long line of helmets and cuirasses. Thank Heaven! it was the soldiery.

‘Are the Jews coming?’ ‘Is the city quiet?’ ‘Why did not you prevent
this villainy?’ ‘A thousand citizens murdered while you have been
snoring!’--and a volley of similar ejaculations, greeted the soldiers as
they passed, and were answered by a cool--‘To your perches, and sleep,
you noisy chickens, or we’ll set the coop on fire about your ears.’

A yell of defiance answered this polite speech, and the soldiery, who
knew perfectly well that the unarmed ecclesiastics within were not to be
trifled with, and had no ambition to die by coping-stones and hot water,
went quietly on their way.

All danger was now past; and the cackling rose jubilant, louder than
ever, and might have continued till daylight, had not a window in
the courtyard been suddenly thrown open, and the awful voice of Cyril
commanded silence.

‘Every man sleep where he can. I shall want you at daybreak. The
superiors of the parabolani are to come up to me with the two prisoners,
and the men who took them.’

In a few minutes Philammon found himself, with some twenty others, in
the great man’s presence: he was sitting at his desk, writing, quietly,
small notes on slips of paper.

‘Here is the youth who helped me to pursue the murderer, and having
outrun me, was attacked by the prisoners,’ said Peter. ‘My hands are
clean from blood, I thank the Lord!’

‘Three set on me with daggers,’ said Philammon, apologetically, ‘and I
was forced to take this one’s dagger away, and beat off the two others
with it.’

Cyril smiled, and shook his head.

‘Thou art a brave boy; but hast thou not read, “If a man smite thee on
one cheek, turn to him the other”?’

‘I could not run away, as Master Peter and the rest did.’

‘So you ran away, eh? my worthy friend?’

‘Is it not written,’ asked Peter, in his blandest tone, “If they
persecute you in one city, flee unto another”?’

Cyril smiled again. ‘And why could not you run away, boy?’

Philammon blushed scarlet, but he dared not lie. ‘There was a--a poor
black woman, wounded and trodden down, and I dare not leave her, for she
told me she was a Christian.’

‘Right, my son, right. I shall remember this. What was her name?’

‘I did not hear it.--Stay, I think she said Judith.’

‘Ah! the wife of the porter who stands at the lecture-room door, which
God confound! A devout woman, full of good works, and sorely ill-treated
by her heathen husband. Peter, thou shalt go to her to-morrow with the
physician, and see if she is in need of anything. Boy, thou hast done
well. Cyril never forgets. Now bring up those Jews. Their Rabbis were
with me two hours ago promising peace: and this is the way they
have kept their promise. So be it. The wicked is snared in his own
wickedness.’

The Jews were brought in, but kept a stubborn silence.

‘Your holiness perceives,’ said some one, ‘that they have each of them
rings of green palm-bark on their right hand.’

‘A very dangerous sign! An evident conspiracy!’ commented Peter.

‘Ah! What does that mean, you rascals? Answer me, as you value your
lives.’

‘You have no business with us: we are Jews, and none of your people,’
said one sulkily. ‘None of my people? You have murdered my people! None
of my people? Every soul in Alexandria is mine, if the kingdom of God
means anything; and you shall find it out. I shall not argue with you,
my good friends, anymore than I did with your Rabbis. Take these fellows
away, Peter, and lock them up in the fuel-cellar, and see that they
are guarded. If any man lets them go, his life shall be for the life of
them.’

And the two worthies were led out.

‘Now, my brothers, here are your orders. You will divide these notes
among yourselves, and distribute them to trusty and godly Catholics in
your districts. Wait one hour, till the city be quiet; and then start,
and raise the church. I must have thirty thousand men by sunrise.’

‘What for, your holiness?’ asked a dozen voices.

‘Read your notes. Whosoever will fight to-morrow under the banner of the
Lord, shall have free plunder of the Jews’ quarter, outrage and murder
only forbidden. As I have said it, God do so to me, and more also, if
there be a Jew left in Alexandria by to-morrow at noon. Go.’

And the staff of orderlies filed out, thanking Heaven that they had
a leader so prompt and valiant, and spent the next hour over the hall
fire, eating millet cakes, drinking bad beer, likening Cyril to Barak,
Gideon, Samson, Jephtha, Judas Maccabeus, and all the worthies of the
Old Testament, and then started on their pacific errand.

Philammon was about to follow them, when Cyril stopped him.

‘Stay, my son; you are young and rash, and do not know the city. Lie
down here and sleep in the anteroom. Three hours hence the sun rises,
and we go forth against the enemies of the Lord.’

Philammon threw himself on the floor in a corner, and slumbered like a
child, till he was awakened in the gray dawn by one of the parabolani.

‘Up, boy! and see what we can do. Cyril goes down greater than Barak the
son of Abinoam, not with ten, but with thirty thousand men at his feet!’

‘Ay, my brothers!’ said Cyril, as he passed proudly out in full
pontificals, with a gorgeous retinue of priests and deacons--‘the
Catholic Church has her organisation, her unity, her common cause, her
watchwords, such as the tyrants of the earth, in their weakness and
their divisions, may envy and tremble at, but cannot imitate. Could
Orestes raise, in three hours, thirty thousand men, who would die for
him?’

‘As we will for you!’ shouted many voices.

‘Say for the kingdom of God.’ And he passed out.

And so ended Philammon’s first day in Alexandria.



CHAPTER VI: THE NEW DIOGENES


About five o’clock the next morning, Raphael Aben-Ezra was lying in bed,
alternately yawning over a manuscript of Philo Judaeus, pulling the ears
of his huge British mastiff, watching the sparkle of the fountain in the
court outside, wondering when that lazy boy would come to tell him that
the bath was warmed, and meditating, half aloud....

‘Alas! poor me! Here I am, back again--just at the point from which I
started!.... How am I to get free from that heathen Siren? Plagues on
her! I shall end by falling in love with her.... I don’t know that I
have not got a barb of the blind boy in me already. I felt absurdly
glad the other day when that fool told me he dare not accept her modest
offer. Ha! ha! A delicious joke it would have been to have seen Orestes
bowing down to stocks and stones, and Hypatia installed in the ruins of
the Serapeium, as High Priestess of the Abomination of Desolation!. And
now.... Well I call all heaven and earth to witness, that I have fought
valiantly. I have faced naughty little Eros like a man, rod in hand.
What could a poor human being do more than try to marry her to some one
else, in hopes of sickening himself of the whole matter? Well, every
moth has its candle, and every man his destiny. But the daring of
the little fool! What huge imaginations she has! She might be another
Zenobia, now, with Orestes as Odenatus, and Raphael Aben-Ezra to play
the part of Longinus, and receive Longinus’s salary of axe or poison.
She don’t care for me; she would sacrifice me, or a thousand of me, the
cold-blooded fanatical archangel that she is, to water with our blood
the foundation of some new temple of cast rags and broken dolls.... Oh,
Raphael Aben-Ezra, what a fool you are!.... You know you are going off
as usual to her lecture, this very morning!’

At this crisis of his confessions the page entered, and announced, not
the bath, but Miriam.

The old woman, who, in virtue of her profession, had the private entry
of all fashionable chambers in Alexandria, came in hurriedly; and
instead of seating herself as usual, for a gossip, remained standing,
and motioned the boy out of the room.

‘Well my sweet mother? Sit: Ah? I see! You rascal, you have brought in
no wine for the lady. Don’t you know her little ways yet?’

‘Eos has got it at the door, of course,’ answered the boy, with a saucy
air of offended virtue.

‘Out with you, imp of Satan!’ cried Miriam. ‘This is no time for
winebibbing. Raphael Aben-Ezra, why are you lying here? Did you not
receive a note last night?’

‘A note? So I did, but I was too sleepy to read it. There it lies. Boy,
bring it here....What’s this? A scrap out of Jeremiah? “Arise, and
flee for thy life, for evil is determined against the whole house
of Israel!”--Does this come from the chief rabbi; I always took the
venerable father for a sober man.... Eh, Miriam?’

‘Fool! instead of laughing at the sacred words of the prophets, get up
and obey them. I sent you the note.’

‘Why can’t I obey them in bed? Here I am, reading hard at the Cabbala,
or Philo--who is stupider still--and what more would you have?’

The old woman, unable to restrain her impatience, literally ran at him,
gnashing her teeth, and, before he was aware, dragged him out of bed
upon the floor, where he stood meekly wondering what would come next.

‘Many thanks, mother, for having saved me the one daily torture of
life--getting out of bed by one’s own exertion.’

‘Raphael Aben-Ezra! are you so besotted with your philosophy and your
heathenry, and your laziness, and your contempt for God and man, that
you will see your nation given up for a prey, and your wealth plundered
by heathen dogs? I tell you, Cyril has sworn that God shall do so to
him, and more also, if there be a Jew left in Alexandria by to-morrow
about this time.’

‘So much the better for the Jews, then, if they are half as tired
of this noisy Pandemonium as I am. But how can I help it? Am I Queen
Esther, to go to Ahasuerus there in the prefect’s palace, and get him to
hold out the golden sceptre to me?’

‘Fool! if you had read that note last night, you might have gone and
saved us, and your name would have been handed down for ever from
generation to generation as a second Mordecai.’

‘My dear mother, Ahasuerus would have been either fast asleep, or far
too drunk to listen to me. Why did you not go yourself?’

‘Do you suppose that I would not have gone if I could? Do you fancy me
a sluggard like yourself? At the risk of my life I have got hither in
time, if there be time to save you.’

‘Well: shall I dress? What can be done now?’

‘Nothing! The streets are blockaded by Cyril’s mob--There! do you hear
the shouts and screams? They are attacking the farther part of the
quarter already.’

‘What! are they murdering them?’ asked Raphael, throwing on his pelisse.
‘Because, if it has really come to a practical joke of that kind, I
shall have the greatest pleasure in employing a counter-irritant. Here,
boy! My sword and dagger! Quick!’

‘No, the hypocrites! No blood is to be shed, they say, if we make no
resistance, and let them pillage. Cyril and his monks are there, to
prevent outrage, and so forth.... The Angel of the Lord scatter them!’

The conversation was interrupted by the rushing in of the whole
household, in an agony of terror; and Raphael, at last thoroughly
roused, went to a window which looked into the street. The thoroughfare
was full of scolding women and screaming children; while men, old and
young, looked on at the plunder of their property with true Jewish
doggedness, too prudent to resist, but too manful to complain--while
furniture came flying out of every window, and from door after door
poured a stream of rascality, carrying off money, jewels, silks, and
all the treasures which Jewish usury had accumulated during many
a generation. But unmoved amid the roaring sea of plunderers and
plundered, stood, scattered up and down, Cyril’s spiritual police,
enforcing, by a word, an obedience which the Roman soldiers could only
have compelled by hard blows of the spear-butt. There was to be no
outrage, and no outrage there was: and more than once some man in
priestly robes hurried through the crowd, leading by the hand, tenderly
enough, a lost child in search of its parents.

Raphael stood watching silently, while Miriam, who had followed him
upstairs, paced the room in an ecstasy of rage, calling vainly to him to
speak or act.

‘Let me alone, mother,’ he said, at last. ‘It will be full ten minutes
more before they pay me a visit, and in the meantime what can one do
better than watch the progress of this, the little Exodus?’

‘Not like that first one! Then we went forth with cymbals and songs to
the Red Sea triumph! Then we borrowed, every woman of her neighbour,
jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment.’

‘And now we pay them back again;.. it is but fair, after all. We ought
to have listened to Jeremiah a thousand years ago, and never gone back
again, like fools, into a country to which we were so deeply in debt.’

‘Accursed land!’ cried Miriam. ‘In an evil hour our forefathers
disobeyed the prophet; and now we reap the harvest of our sins!--Our
sons have forgotten the faith of their forefathers for the philosophy of
the Gentiles, and fill their chambers’ (with a contemptuous look round)
‘with heathen imagery; and our daughters are--Look there!’

As she spoke, a beautiful girl rushed shrieking out of an adjoining
house, followed by some half-drunk ruffian, who was clutching at the
gold chains and trinkets with which she was profusely bedecked, after
the fashion of Jewish women. The rascal had just seized with one hand
her streaming black tresses, and with the other a heavy collar of gold,
which was wound round her throat, when a priest, stepping up, laid a
quiet hand upon his shoulder. The fellow, too maddened to obey, turned,
and struck back the restraining arm...and in an instant was felled to
the earth by a young monk..

‘Touchest thou the Lord’s anointed, sacrilegious wretch?’ cried the man
of the desert, as the fellow dropped on the pavement, with his booty in
his hand.

The monk tore the gold necklace from his grasp, looked at it for a
moment with childish wonder, as a savage might at some incomprehensible
product of civilised industry, and then, spitting on it in contempt,
dashed it on the ground, and trampled it into the mud.

‘Follow the golden wedge of Achan, and the silver of Iscariot, thou root
of all evil!’ And he rushed on, yelling, ‘Down with the circumcision!
Down with the blasphemers!’--while the poor girl vanished among the
crowd.

Raphael watched him with a quaint thoughtful smile, while Miriam
shrieked aloud at the destruction of the precious trumpery.

‘The monk is right, mother. If those Christians go on upon that method,
they must beat us. It has been our ruin from the first, our fancy for
loading ourselves with the thick clay.’

‘What will you do?’ cried Miriam, clutching him by the arm.

‘What will you do?’

‘I am safe. I have a boat waiting for me on the canal at the garden
gate, and in Alexandria I stay; no Christian hound shall make old Miriam
move afoot against her will. My jewels are all buried--my girls are
sold; save what you can, and come with me!’

‘My sweet mother, why so peculiarly solicitous about my welfare, above
that of all the sons of Judah?’

‘Because--because--No, I’ll tell you that another time. But I loved your
mother, and she loved me. Come!’

Raphael relapsed into silence for a few minutes, and watched the tumult
below.

‘How those Christian priests keep their men in order! There is no use
resisting destiny. They are the strong men of the time, after all,
and the little Exodus must needs have its course. Miriam, daughter of
Jonathan--’

‘I am no man’s daughter! I have neither father nor mother, husband
nor--Call me mother again!’

‘Whatsoever I am to call you, there are jewels enough in that closet to
buy half Alexandria. Take them. I am going.’

‘With me!’

‘Out into the wide world, my dear lady. I am bored with riches. That
young savage of a monk understood them better than we Jews do. I shall
just make a virtue of necessity, and turn beggar.’

‘Beggar?’

‘Why not? Don’t argue. These scoundrels will make me one, whether I like
or not; so forth I go. There will be few leavetakings. This brute of a
dog is the only friend I have on earth; and I love her, because she has
the true old, dogged, spiteful, cunning, obstinate Maccabee spirit in
her--of which if we had a spark left in us just now, there would be no
little Exodus; eh, Bran, my beauty?’

‘You can escape with me to the prefect’s, and save the mass of your
wealth.’

‘Exactly what I don’t want to do. I hate that prefect as I hate a dead
camel, or the vulture who eats him. And to tell the truth, I am growing
a great deal too fond of that heathen woman there--’

‘What?’ shrieked the old woman--‘Hypatia?’

‘If you choose. At all events, the easiest way to cut the knot is to
expatriate. I shall beg my passage on board the first ship to Cyrene,
and go and study life in Italy with Heraclian’s expedition. Quick--take
the jewels, and breed fresh troubles for yourself with them. I am going.
My liberators are battering the outer door already.’

Miriam greedily tore out of the closet diamonds and pearls, rubies and
emeralds, and concealed them among her ample robes--‘Go! go! Escape from
her! I will hide your jewels!’

‘Ay, hide them, as mother earth does all things, in that all-embracing
bosom. You will have doubled them before we meet again, no doubt.
Farewell, mother!’

‘But not for ever, Raphael! not for ever! Promise me, in the name of the
four archangels, that if you are in trouble or danger, you will write to
me, at the house of Eudaimon.’

‘The little porter philosopher, who hangs about Hypatia’s lecture-room?’

‘The same, the same. He will give me your letter, and I swear to you,
I will cross the mountains of Kaf, to deliver you!--I will pay you all
back. By Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob I swear! May my tongue cleave to the
roof of my mouth, if I do not account to you for the last penny!’

‘Don’t commit yourself to rash promises, my dear lady. If I am bored
with poverty, I can but borrow a few gold pieces of a rabbi, and turn
pedler. I really do not trust you to pay me back, so I shall not be
disappointed if you do not. Why should I?’

‘Because--because--O God! No--never mind! You shall have all back.
Spirit of Elias! where is the black agate? Why is it not among
these?--The broken half of the black agate talisman!’

Raphael turned pale. ‘How did you know that I have a black agate?’

‘How did I? How did I not?’ cried she, clutching him by the arm. ‘Where
is it? All depends on that! Fool!’ she went on, throwing him off from
her at arm’s length, as a sudden suspicion stung her--‘you have not
given it to the heathen woman?’

‘By the soul of my fathers, then, you mysterious old witch, who seem to
know everything, that is exactly what I have done.’

Miriam clapped her hands together wildly. ‘Lost! lost! lost! Not I will
have it, if I tear it out of her heart! I will be avenged of her--the
strange woman who flatters with her words, to whom the simple go in, and
know not that the dead are there, and that her guests are in the depths
of hell! God do so to me, and more also, if she and her sorceries be on
earth a twelvemonth hence!’

‘Silence, Jezebel! Heathen or none, she is as pure as the sunlight! I
only gave it her because she fancied the talisman upon it.’

‘To enchant you with it, to your ruin!’

‘Brute of a slave-dealer! you fancy every one as base as the poor
wretches whom you buy and sell to shame, that you may make them as much
the children of hell, if that be possible, as yourself!’

Miriam looked at him, her large black eyes widening and kindling. For an
instant she felt for her poniard--and then burst into an agony of tears,
hid her face in her withered hands, and rushed from the room, as a crash
and shout below announced the bursting of the door.

‘There she goes with my jewels. And here come my guests, with the young
monk at their head.--One rising when the other sets. A worthy pair of
Dioscuri! Come, Bran!...Boys! Slaves! Where are you? Steal every one
what he can lay his hands on, and run for your lives through the back
gate.’

The slaves had obeyed him already. He walked smiling downstairs through
utter solitude, and in the front passage met face to face the mob of
monks, costermongers and dock-workers, fishwives and beggars, who were
thronging up the narrow entry, and bursting into the doors right and
left; and at their head, alas! the young monk who had just trampled the
necklace into the mud...no other, in fact, than Philammon.

‘Welcome, my worthy guests! Enter, I beseech you, and fulfil, in your
own peculiar way, the precepts which bid you not be over anxious for the
good things of this life..For eating and drinking, my kitchen and cellar
are at your service. For clothing, if any illustrious personage will
do me the honour to change his holy rags with me, here are an Indian
shawl-pelisse and a pair of silk trousers at his service. Perhaps you
will accommodate me, my handsome young captain, choragus of this new
school of the prophets?’

Philammon, who was the person addressed, tried to push by him
contemptuously.

‘Allow me, sir. I lead the way. This dagger is poisoned,-a scratch and
you are dead. This dog is of the true British breed; if she seizes you,
red-hot iron will not loose her, till she hears the bone crack. If any
one will change clothes with me, all I have is at your service. If not,
the first that stirs is a dead man.’

There was no mistaking the quiet, high-bred determination of the
speaker. Had he raged and blustered, Philammon could have met him on
his own ground: but there was an easy self-possessed disdain about him,
which utterly abashed the young monk, and abashed, too, the whole crowd
of rascals at his heels.

‘I’ll change clothes with you, you Jewish dog!’ roared a dirty fellow
out of the mob.

‘I am your eternal debtor. Let us step into this side room. Walk
upstairs, my friends. Take care there, sir!--That porcelain, whole, is
worth three thousand gold pieces: broken, it is not worth three pence.
I leave it to your good sense to treat it accordingly. Now then, my
friend!’ And in the midst of the raging vortex of plunderers, who
were snatching up everything which they could carry away, and breaking
everything which they could not, lie quietly divested himself of his
finery, and put on the ragged cotton tunic, and battered straw hat,
which the fellow handed over to him.

Philammon, who had had from the first no mind to plunder, stood watching
Raphael with dumb wonder; and a shudder of regret, he knew not why,
passed through him, as he Saw the mob tearing down pictures, and dashing
statues to the ground. Heathen they were, doubtless; but still, the
Nymphs and Venuses looked too lovely to be so brutally destroyed...
There was something almost humanly pitiful in their poor broken arms and
legs, as they lay about upon the pavement.... He laughed at himself for
the notion; but he could not laugh it away.

Raphael seemed to think that he ought not to laugh it away; for he
pointed to the fragments, and with a quaint look at the young monk--

‘Our nurses used to tell us, ‘“If you can’t make it, You ought not to
break it.”’

‘I had no nurse,’ said Philammon.

‘Ah!--that accounts--for this and other things. Well,’ he went on, with
the most provoking good-nature, ‘you are in a fair road, my handsome
youth; I wish you joy of your fellow-workmen, and of your apprenticeship
in the noble art of monkery. Riot and pillage, shrieking women and
houseless children in your twentieth summer, are the sure path to a
Saint-ship, such as Paul of Tarsus, who, with all his eccentricities,
was a gentleman, certainly never contemplated. I have heard of Phoebus
Apollo under many disguises, but this is the first time I ever saw him
in the wolf’s hide.’

‘Or in the lion’s,’ said Philammon, trying in his shame to make a fine
speech.

‘Like the Ass in the Fable. Farewell! Stand out of the way, friends!
‘Ware teeth and poison!’

And he disappeared among the crowd, who made way respectfully enough for
his dagger and his brindled companion.



CHAPTER VII: THOSE BY WHOM OFFENCES COME


Philammon’s heart smote him all that day, whenever he thought of his
morning’s work. Till then all Christians, monks above all, had been
infallible in his eyes: all Jews and heathens insane and accursed.
Moreover, meekness under insult, fortitude in calamity, the contempt of
worldly comfort, the worship of poverty as a noble estate, were virtues
which the Church Catholic boasted as her peculiar heritage: on which
side had the balance of those qualities inclined that morning? The
figure of Raphael, stalking out ragged and penniless into the wide
world, haunted him, with its quiet self-assured smile. And there haunted
him, too, another peculiarity in the man, which he had never before
remarked in any one but Arsenius--that ease and grace, that courtesy and
self-restraint, which made Raphael’s rebukes rankle all the more keenly,
because he felt that the rebuker was in some mysterious way superior to
him, and saw through him, and could have won him Over, Or crushed him
in argument, or in intrigue--or in anything, perhaps, except mere brute
force. Strange--that Raphael, of all men, should in those few moments
have reminded him so much of Arsenius; and that the very same qualities
which gave a peculiar charm to the latter should give a peculiar
unloveliness to the former, and yet be, without a doubt, the same. What
was it? Was it rank which gave it Arsenius had been a great man, he
knew--the companion of kings. And Raphael seemed rich. He had heard
the mob crying out against the prefect for favouring him. Was it then
familiarity with the great ones of the world which produced this manner
and tone? It was a real strength, whether in Arsenius or in Raphael. He
felt humbled before it--envied it. If it made Arsenius a more complete
and more captivating person, why should it not do the same for him? Why
should not he, too, have his share of it?

Bringing with it such thoughts as these, the time ran on till noon, and
the mid-day meal, and the afternoon’s work, to which Philammon looked
forward joyfully, as a refuge from his own thoughts.

He was sitting on his sheepskin upon a step, basking, like a true son
of the desert, in a blaze of fiery sunshine, which made the black
stone-work too hot to touch with the bare hand, watching the swallows,
as they threaded the columns of the Serapeium, and thinking how often he
had delighted in their air-dance, as they turned and hawked up and down
the dear old glen at Scetis. A crowd of citizens with causes,
appeals, and petitions, were passing in and out from the patriarch’s
audience-room. Peter and the archdeacon were waiting in the shade close
by for the gathering of the parabolani, and talking over the morning’s
work in an earnest whisper, in which the names of Hypatia and Orestes
were now and then audible.

An old priest came up, and bowing reverently enough to the archdeacon,
requested the help of one of the parabolani. He had a sailor’s family,
all fever-stricken, who must be removed to the hospital at once.

The archdeacon looked at him, answered an off-hand ‘Very well,’ and went
on with his talk.

The priest, bowing lower than before, re-presented the immediate
necessity for help.

‘It is very odd,’ said Peter to the swallows in the Serapeium, ‘that
some people cannot obtain influence enough in their own parishes to get
the simplest good works performed without tormenting his holiness the
patriarch.’

The old priest mumbled some sort of excuse, and the archdeacon, without
deigning a second look at him, said--‘Find him a man, brother Peter.
Anybody will do. What is that boy--Philammon--doing there? Let him go
with Master Hieracas.’

Peter seemed not to receive the proposition favourably, and whispered
something to the archdeacon....

‘No. I can spare none of the rest. Importunate persons must take their
chance of being well served. Come--here are our brethren; we will all go
together.’

‘The farther together the better for the boy’s sake,’ grumbled Peter,
loud enough for Philammon--perhaps for the old priest--to overhear him.

So Philammon went out with them, and as he went questioned his
companions meekly enough as to who Raphael was.

‘A friend of Hypatia!’--that name, too, haunted him; and he began, as
stealthily and indirectly as he could, to obtain information about her.
There was no need for his caution; for the very mention of her name
roused the whole party into a fury of execration.

‘May God confound her, siren, enchantress, dealer in spells and
sorceress! She is the strange woman of whom Solomon prophesied.’

‘It is my opinion,’ said another, ‘that she is the forerunner of
Antichrist.’

‘Perhaps the virgin of whom it is prophesied that he will be born,’
suggested another.

‘Not that, I’ll warrant her,’ said Peter, with a savage sneer.

‘And is Raphael Aben-Ezra her pupil in philosophy?’ asked Philammon.

‘Her pupil in whatsoever she can find where-with to delude men’s souls,’
said the old priest.

‘The reality of philosophy has died long ago, but the great ones find it
still worth their while to worship its shadow.’

‘Some of them worship more than a shadow, when they haunt her house,’
said Peter. ‘Do you think Orestes goes thither only for philosophy?’

‘We must not judge harsh judgments,’ said the old priest; ‘Synesius of
Cyrene is a holy man, and yet he loves Hypatia well.’

‘He a holy man?--and keeps a wife! One who had the insolence to tell the
blessed Theophilus himself that he would not be made bishop unless he
were allowed to remain with her; and despised the gift of the Holy Ghost
in comparison of the carnal joys of wedlock, not knowing the Scriptures,
which saith that those who are in the flesh cannot please God! Well said
Siricius of Rome of such men--“Can the Holy Spirit of God dwell in other
than holy bodies?” No wonder that such a one as Synesius grovels at the
feet of Orestes’ mistress!’

‘Then she is profligate?’ asked Philammon.

‘She must be. Has a heathen faith and grace? And without faith and
grace, are not all our righteousnesses as filthy rags? What says St.
Paul?--That God has given them over to a reprobate mind, full of all
injustice, uncleanness, covetousness, maliciousness, you know the
catalogue--why do you ask me?’

‘Alas! and is she this?’

‘Alas! And why alas? How would the Gospel be glorified if heathens were
holier than Christians? It ought to be so, therefore it is so. If she
seems to have virtues, they, being done without the grace of Christ, are
only bedizened vices, cunning shams, the devil transformed into an
angel of light. And as for chastity, the flower and crown of all
virtues--whosoever says that she, being yet a heathen, has that,
blasphemes the Holy Spirit, whose peculiar and highest gift it is, and
is anathema maranatha for ever! Amen!’ And Peter, devoutly crossing
himself, turned angrily and contemptuously away from his young
companion.

Philammon was quite shrewd enough to see that assertion was not
identical with proof. But Peter’s argument of ‘it ought to be, therefore
it is,’ is one which saves a great deal of trouble...and no doubt he had
very good sources of information. So Philammon walked on, sad, he knew
not why, at the new notion which he had formed of Hypatia, as a sort
of awful sorceress--Messalina, whose den was foul with magic rites and
ruined souls of men. And yet if that was all she had to teach, whence
had her pupil Raphael learned that fortitude of his? If philosophy had,
as they said, utterly died out, then what was Raphael?

Just then, Peter and the rest turned up a side street, and Philammon and
Hieracas were left to go on their joint errand together. They paced on
for some way in silence, up one street and down another, till Philammon,
for want of anything better to say, asked where they were going.

‘Where I choose, at all events. No, young man! If I, a priest, am to be
insulted by archdeacons and readers, I won’t be insulted by you.’

‘I assure you I meant no harm.’

‘Of course not; you all learn the same trick, and the young ones catch
it of the old ones fast enough. Words smoother than butter, yet very
swords.’

‘You do not mean to complain of the archdeacon and his companions?’ said
Philammon, who of course was boiling over with pugnacious respect for
the body to which he belonged.

No answer.

‘Why, sir, are they not among the most holy and devoted of men?’

‘Ah--yes,’ said his companion, in a tone which sounded very like
‘Ah--no.’

‘You do not think so?’ asked Philammon bluntly.

‘You are young, you are young. Wait a while till you have seen as much
as I have. A degenerate age this, my son; not like the good old times,
when men dare suffer and die for the faith. We are too prosperous
nowadays; and fine ladies walk about with Magdalens embroidered on their
silks, and gospels hanging round their necks. When I was young they died
for that with which they now bedizen themselves.’

‘But I was speaking of the parabolani.’

‘Ah, there are a great many among them who have not much business where
they are. Don’t say I said so. But many a rich man puts his name on the
list of the guild just to get his exemption from taxes, and leaves the
work to poor men like you. Rotten, rotten! my son, and you will find
it out. The preachers, now--people used to say--I know Abbot Isidore
did--that I had as good a gift for expounding as any man in Pelusium;
but since I came here, eleven years since, if you will believe it, I
have never been asked to preach in my own parish church.’

‘You surely jest!’

‘True, as I am a christened man. I know why--I know why: they are afraid
of Isidore’s men here.... Perhaps they may have caught the holy man’s
trick of plain speaking--and ears are dainty in Alexandria. And there
are some in these parts, too, that have never forgiven him the part he
took about those three villains, Marc, Zosimus, and Martinian, and a
certain letter that came of it; or another letter either, which we
know of, about taking alms for the church from the gains of robbers and
usurers. “Cyril never forgets.” So he says to every one who does him a
good turn.... And so he does to every one who he fancies has done him
a bad one. So here am I slaving away, a subordinate priest, while such
fellows as Peter the Reader look down on me as their slave. But
it’s always so. There never was a bishop yet, except the blessed
Augustine--would to Heaven I had taken my abbot’s advice, and gone to
him at Hippo!--who had not his flatterers and his tale-bearers, and
generally the archdeacon at the head of them, ready to step into the
bishop’s place when he dies, over the heads of hard-working parish
priests. But that is the way of the world. The sleekest and the oiliest,
and the noisiest; the man who can bring in most money to the charities,
never mind whence or how; the man who will take most of the bishop’s
work off his hands, and agree with him in everything he wants, and save
him, by spying and eavesdropping, the trouble of using his own eyes;
that is the man to succeed in Alexandria, or Constantinople, or Rome
itself. Look now; there are but seven deacons to this great city, and
all its priests; and they and the archdeacon are the masters of it and
us. They and that Peter manage Cyril’s work for him, and when Cyril
makes the archdeacon a bishop, he will make Peter archdeacon....They
have their reward, they have their reward; and so has Cyril, for that
matter.’

‘How?’

‘Why, don’t say I said it. But what do I care? I have nothing to lose,
I’m sure. But they do say that there are two ways of promotion in
Alexandria: one by deserving it, the other by paying for it. That’s
all.’

‘Impossible!’

‘Oh, of course, quite impossible. But all I know is just this, that when
that fellow Martinian got back again into Pelusium, after being turned
out by the late bishop for a rogue and hypocrite as he was, and got the
ear of this present bishop, and was appointed his steward, and ordained
priest--I’d as soon have ordained that street-dog--and plundered him and
brought him to disgrace--for I don’t believe this bishop is a bad man,
but those who use rogues must expect to be called rogues--and ground the
poor to the earth, and tyrannised over the whole city so that no man’s
property, or reputation, scarcely their lives, were safe; and after all,
had the impudence, when he was called on for his accounts, to bring the
church in as owing him money; I just know this, that he added to all his
other shamelessness this, that he offered the patriarch a large sum of
money to buy a bishopric of him.... And what do you think the patriarch
answered?’

‘Excommunicated the sacrilegious wretch, of course!’

‘Sent him a letter to say that if he dared to do such a thing again he
should really be forced to expose him! So the fellow, taking courage,
brought his money himself the next time; and all the world says that
Cyril would have made him a bishop after all, if Abbot Isidore had not
written to remonstrate.’

‘He could not have known the man’s character,’ said poor Philammon,
hunting for an excuse.

‘The whole Delta was ringing with it. Isidore had written to him again
and again.’

‘Surely then his wish was to prevent scandal, and preserve the unity of
the church in the eyes of the heathen.’

The old man laughed bitterly.

‘Ah, the old story--of preventing scandals by retaining them, and
fancying that sin is a less evil than a little noise; as if the worst of
all scandals was not the being discovered in hushing up a scandal. And
as for unity, if you want that, you must go back to the good old times
of Dioclesian and Decius.’

‘The persecutors?’

‘Ay, boy--to the times of persecution, when Christians died like
brothers, because they lived like brothers. You will see very little of
that now, except in some little remote county bishopric, which no one
ever hears of from year’s end to year’s end. But in the cities it is
all one great fight for place and power. Every one is jealous of his
neighbour. The priests are jealous of the deacons, and good cause they
have. The county bishops are jealous of the metropolitan, and he is
jealous of the North African bishops, and quite right he is. What
business have they to set up for themselves, as if they were infallible?
It’s a schism, I say--a complete schism. They are just as bad as their
own Donatists. Did not the Council of Nice settle that the Metropolitan
of Alexandria should have authority over Libya and Pentapolis, according
to the ancient custom?’

‘Of course he ought,’ said Philammon, jealous for the honour of his own
patriarchate.

‘And the patriarchs of Rome and Constantinople are jealous of our
patriarch.’

‘Of Cyril?’

‘Of course, because he won’t be at their beck and nod, and let them be
lords and masters of Africa.’

‘But surely these things can be settled by councils?’

‘Councils? Wait till you have been at one. The blessed Abbot Isidore
used to say, that if he ever was a bishop--which he never will be--he
is far too honest for that--he would never go near one of them; for he
never had seen one which did not call out every evil passion in men’s
hearts, and leave the question more confounded with words than they
found it, even if the whole matter was not settled beforehand by some
chamberlain, or eunuch, or cook sent from court, as if he were an
anointed vessel of the Spirit, to settle the dogmas of the Holy Catholic
Church.’

‘Cook?’

‘Why, Valens sent his chief cook to stop Basil of Caesarea from opposing
the Court doctrine.... I tell you, the great battle in these cases is
to get votes from courts, or to get to court yourself. When I was young,
the Council of Antioch had to make a law to keep bishops from running
off to Constantinople to intrigue, under pretence of pleading the cause
of the orphan and widow. But what’s the use of that, when every noisy
and ambitious man shifts and shifts, from one see to another, till he
settles himself close to Rome or Byzantium, and gets the emperor’s ear,
and plays into the hands of his courtiers?’

‘Is it not written, “Speak not evil of dignities”? ‘said Philammon, in
his most sanctimonious tone.

‘Well, what of that? I don’t speak evil of dignities, when I complain of
the men who fill them badly, do I?’

‘I never heard that interpretation of the text before.’

‘Very likely not. That’s no reason why it should not be true and
orthodox. You will soon hear a good many more things, which are true
enough--though whether they are orthodox or not, the court cooks must
settle. Of course, I am a disappointed, irreverent old grumbler.
Of course, and of course, too, young men must needs buy their own
experience, instead of taking old folks’ at a gift. There--use your own
eyes, and judge for yourself. There you may see what sort of saints are
bred by this plan of managing the Catholic Church. There comes one of
them. Now! I say no more!’

As he spoke, two tall negroes came up to them, and set down before
the steps of a large church which they were passing an object new to
Philammon--a sedan-chair, the poles of which were inlaid with ivory and
silver, and the upper part enclosed in rose-coloured silk curtains.

‘What is inside that cage?’ asked he of the old priest, as the negroes
stood wiping the perspiration from their foreheads, and a smart
slave-girl stepped forward, with a parasol and slippers in her hand, and
reverently lifted the lower edge of the curtain.

‘A saint, I tell you!’

An embroidered shoe, with a large gold cross on the instep, was put
forth delicately from beneath the curtain, and the kneeling maid put on
the slipper over it.

‘There!’ whispered the old grumbler. ‘Not enough, you see, to use
Christian men as beasts of burden--Abbot Isidore used to say--ay, and
told Iron, the pleader, to his face, that he could not conceive how a
man who loved Christ, and knew the grace which has made all men free,
could keep a slave.’

‘Nor can I,’ said Philammon.

‘But we think otherwise, you see, in Alexandria here. We can’t even walk
up the steps of God’s temple without an additional protection to our
delicate feet.’

‘I had thought it was written, “Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for
the place where thou standest is holy ground.”’

‘Ah! there are a good many more things written which we do not find
it convenient to recollect.--Look! There is one of the pillars of the
church-the richest and most pious lady in Alexandria.’

And forth stepped a figure, at which Philammon’s eyes opened wider than
they had done even at the sight of Pelagia. Whatever thoughts the rich
and careless grace of her attire might have raised in his mind, it had
certainly not given his innate Greek good taste the inclination to
laugh and weep at once, which he felt at this specimen of the tasteless
fashion of an artificial and decaying civilisation. Her gown was stuffed
out behind in a fashion which provoked from the dirty boys who lay about
the steps, gambling for pistachios on their fingers, the same comments
with which St. Clement had upbraided from the pulpit the Alexandrian
ladies of his day. The said gown of white silk was bedizened, from waist
to ankle, with certain mysterious red and green figures at least a foot
long, which Philammon gradually discovered to be a representation, in
the very lowest and ugliest style of fallen art, of Dives and Lazarus;
while down her back hung, upon a bright blue shawl, edged with
embroidered crosses, Job sitting, potsherd in hand, surrounded by his
three friends--a memorial, the old priest whispered, of a pilgrimage
which she had taken a year or two before, to Arabia, to see and kiss the
identical dunghill on which the patriarch had sat.

Round her neck hung, by one of half a dozen necklaces, a manuscript of
the Gospels, gilt-edged and clasped with jewels; the lofty diadem of
pearls on the head carried in front a large gold cross; while above and
around it her hair, stiffened with pomatum, was frizzled out half a foot
from a wilderness of plaits and curls, which must have cost some hapless
slave-girl an hour’s work, and perhaps more than one scolding, that very
morning.

Meekly, with simpering face and downcast eyes, and now and then a
penitent sigh and shake of the head and pressure of her hand on her
jewelled bosom, the fair penitent was proceeding up the steps, when she
caught sight of the priest and the monk, and turning to them with an
obeisance of the deepest humility, entreated to be allowed to kiss the
hem of their garments.

‘You had far better, madam,’ said Philammon, bluntly enough, ‘kiss the
hem of your own. You carry two lessons there which you do not seem to
have learnt yet.’

In an instant her face flashed up into pride and fury. ‘I asked for your
blessing, and not for a sermon. I can have that when I like.’

‘And such as you like,’ grumbled the old priest, as she swept up the
steps, tossing some small coin to the ragged boys, and murmuring to
herself, loud enough for Philammon’s hearing, that she should certainly
inform the confessor, and that she would not be insulted in the streets
by savage monks.

‘Now she will confess her sins inside--all but those which she has been
showing off to us here outside, and beat her breast, and weep like a
very Magdalen; and then the worthy man will comfort her with--“What a
beautiful chain! And what a shawl--allow me to touch it! How soft and
delicate this Indian wool! Ah! if you knew the debts which I have been
compelled to incur in the service of the sanctuary!--” And then of
course the answer will be, as, indeed, he expects it should, that if it
can be of the least use in the service of the Temple, she, of course,
will think it only too great an honour.... And he will keep the chain,
and perhaps the shawl too. And she will go home, believing that she
has fulfilled to the very letter the command to break off her sins by
almsgiving, and only sorry that the good priest happened to hit on that
particular gewgaw!’

‘What,’ asked Philammon; ‘dare she actually not refuse such
importunity?’

‘From a poor priest like me, stoutly enough; but from a popular
ecclesiastic like him.... As Jerome says, in a letter of his I once saw,
ladies think twice in such cases before they offend the city newsmonger.
Have you anything more to say?’

Philammon had nothing to say; and wisely held his peace, while the old
grumbler ran on--

‘Ah, boy, you have yet to learn city fashions! When you are a little
older, instead of speaking unpleasant truths to a fine lady with a cross
on her forehead, you will be ready to run to the Pillars of Hercules
at her beck and nod, for the sake of her disinterested help towards a
fashionable pulpit, or perhaps a bishopric. The ladies settle that for
us here.’

‘The women?’

‘The women, lad. Do you suppose that they heap priests and churches
with wealth for nothing? They have their reward. Do you suppose that
a preacher gets into the pulpit of that church there, without looking
anxiously, at the end of each peculiarly flowery sentence, to see
whether her saintship there is clapping or not? She, who has such a
delicate sense for orthodoxy, that she can scent out Novatianism or
Origenism where no other mortal nose would suspect it. She who meets at
her own house weekly all the richest and most pious women of the city,
to settle our discipline for us’ as the court cooks do our doctrine. She
who has even, it is whispered, the ear of the Augusta Pulcheria herself,
and sends monthly letters to her at Constantinople, and might give the
patriarch himself some trouble’ if he crossed her holy will!’

‘What! will Cyril truckle to such creatures?’

‘Cyril is a wise man in his generation--too wise, some say, for a child
of the light. But at least, he knows there is no use fighting with those
whom you cannot conquer; and while he can get money out of these great
ladies for his almshouses, and orphan-houses, and lodging-houses, and
hospitals, and workshops, and all the rest of it--and in that, I will
say for him, there is no man on earth equal to him, but Ambrose of Milan
and Basil of Caesarea--why, I don’t quarrel with him for making the best
of a bad matter; and a very bad matter it is, boy, and has been ever
since emperors and courtiers have given up burning and crucifying us,
and taken to patronising and bribing us instead.’

Philammon walked on in silence by the old priest’s side, stunned and
sickened.... ‘And this is what I have come out to see--reeds shaken in
the wind, and men clothed in soft raiment, fit only for kings’ palaces!’
For this he had left the dear old Laura, and the simple joys and
friendships of childhood, and cast himself into a roaring whirlpool of
labour and temptation! This was the harmonious strength and unity of
that Church Catholic, in which, as he had been taught from boyhood,
there was but one Lord, one Faith, one Spirit. This was the indivisible
body, ‘without spot or wrinkle, which fitly joined together and
compacted by that which every member supplied, according to the
effectual and proportionate working of every part, increased the
body, and enabled it to build itself up in Love!’ He shuddered as the
well-known words passed through his memory, and seemed to mock the
base and chaotic reality around him. He felt angry with the old man for
having broken his dream; he longed to believe that his complaints were
only exaggerations of cynic peevishness, of selfish disappointment; and
yet, had not Arsenius warned him? Had he not foretold, word for word,
what the youth would find-what he had found? Then was Saint Paul’s great
idea an empty and an impossible dream? No! God’s word could not fail;
the Church could not err. The fault could not be in her, but in her
enemies; not, as the old man said, in her too great prosperity, but in
her slavery. And then the words which he had heard from Cyril at their
first interview rose before him as the true explanation. How could the
Church work freely and healthily while she was crushed and fettered by
the rulers of this world? And how could they be anything but the tyrants
and antichrists they were, while they were menaced and deluded by
heathen philosophy, and vain systems of human wisdom? If Orestes was the
curse of the Alexandrian Church, then Hypatia was the curse of Orestes.
On her head the true blame lay. She was the root of the evil. Who would
extirpate it?....

Why should not he? It might be dangerous; yet, successful or
unsuccessful, it must be glorious. The course of Christianity wanted
great examples. Might he not-and his young heart beat high at the
thought--might he not, by some great act of daring, self-sacrifice,
divine madness of faith, like David’s of old, when he went out against
the giant--awaken selfish and luxurious souls to a noble emulation, and
recall to their minds, perhaps to their lives, the patterns of those
martyrs who were the pride, the glory, the heirloom of Egypt? And as
figure after figure rose before his imagination, of simple men and weak
women who had conquered temptation and shame, torture and death, to live
for ever on the lips of men, and take their seats among the patricians
of the heavenly court, with brows glittering through all eternities with
the martyr’s crown, his heart beat thick and fast, and he longed only
for an opportunity to dare and die.

And the longing begot the opportunity. For he had hardly rejoined his
brother visitors when the absorbing thought took word again, and he
began questioning them eagerly for more information about Hypatia.

On that point, indeed, he obtained nothing but fresh invective; but when
his companions, after talking of the triumph which the true faith had
gained that morning, went on to speak of the great overthrow of Paganism
twenty years before, under the patriarch Theophilus; of Olympiodorus and
his mob, who held the Serapeium for many days by force of arms against
the Christians, making sallies into the city, and torturing and
murdering the prisoners whom they took; of the martyrs who, among those
very pillars which overhung their heads, had died in torments rather
than sacrifice to Serapis; and of the final victory, and the soldier
who, in presence of the trembling mob, clove the great jaw of the
colossal idol, and snapped for ever the spell of heathenism, Philammon’s
heart burned to distinguish himself like that soldier, and to wipe out
his qualms of conscience by some more unquestionable deed of Christian
prowess. There were no idols now to break but there was philosophy--‘Why
not carry war into the heart of the enemy’s camp, and beard Satan in his
very den? Why does not some man of God go boldly into the lecture-room
of the sorceress, and testify against her to her face?’

‘Do it yourself, if you dare,’ said Peter. ‘We have no wish to get our
brains knocked out by all the profligate young gentlemen in the city.’

‘I will do it,’ said Philammon.

‘That is, if his holiness allows you to make such a fool of yourself.’

‘Take care, sir, of your words. You revile the blessed martyrs, from St.
Stephen to St. Telemachus, when you call such a deed foolishness.’

‘I shall most certainly inform his holiness of your insolence.’

‘Do so,’ said Philammon, who, possessed with a new idea, wished for
nothing more. And there the matter dropped for the time. ...............

‘The presumption of the young in this generation is growing
insufferable,’ said Peter to his master that evening.

‘So much the better. They put their elders on their mettle in the race
of good works. But who has been presuming to-day?’

‘That mad boy whom Pambo sent up from the deserts dared to offer himself
as champion of the faith against Hypatia. He actually proposed to go
into her lecture-room and argue with her to her face. What think you of
that for a specimen of youthful modesty and self-distrust?’

Cyril was silent a while.

‘What answer am I to have the honour of taking back? A month’s
relegation to Nitria on bread and water? You, I am sure, will not allow
such things to go unpunished; indeed, if they do, there is an end to all
authority and discipline.’

Cyril was still silent; whilst Peter’s brow clouded fast. At last he
answered--

‘The cause wants martyrs. Send the boy to me.’

Peter went down with a shrug, and an expression of face which looked but
too like envy, and ushered up the trembling youth, who dropped on his
knees as soon as he entered.

‘So you wish to go into the heathen woman’s lecture-room, and defy her?
Have you courage for it?’

‘God will give it me.’

‘You will be murdered by her pupils.’

‘I can defend myself,’ said Philammon, with a pardonable glance
downward at his sinewy limbs. ‘And if not: what death more glorious than
martyrdom?’

Cyril smiled genially enough. ‘Promise me two things.’

‘Two thousand, if you will.’

‘Two are quite difficult enough to keep. Youth is rash in promises, and
rasher in forgetting them. Promise me that, whatever happens, you will
not strike the first blow.’

‘I do.’

‘Promise me again, that you will not argue with her.’

‘What then?’

‘Contradict, denounce, defy. But give no reasons. If you do, you are
lost. She is subtler than the serpent, skilled in all the tricks of
logic, and you will become a laughing-stock, and run away in shame.
Promise me.’

‘I do.’

‘Then go.’

‘When?’

‘The sooner the better. At what hour does the accursed woman lecture
to-morrow, Peter?’

‘We saw her going to the Museum at nine this morning.’

‘Then go at nine to-morrow. There is money for you.’

‘What is this for?’ asked Philammon, fingering curiously the first coins
which he ever had handled in his life.

‘To pay for your entrance. To the philosopher none enters without money.
Not so to the Church of God, open all day long to the beggar and the
slave. If you convert her, well. And if not’.... And he added to himself
between his teeth, ‘And if not, well also--perhaps better.’

‘Ay!’ said Peter bitterly, as he ushered Philammon out. ‘Go up to Ramoth
Gilead, and prosper, young fool! What evil spirit sent you here to feed
the noble patriarch’s only weakness?’

‘What do you mean?’ asked Philammon, as fiercely as he dare.

‘The fancy that preachings, and protestations, and martyrdoms can drive
out the Canaanites, who can only be got rid of with the sword of the
Lord and of Gideon. His uncle Theophilus knew that well enough. If he
had not, Olympiodorus might have been master of Alexandria, and incense
burning before Serapis to this day. Ay, go, and let her convert you!
Touch the accursed thing, like Achan, and see if you do not end by
having it in your tent. Keep company with the daughters of Midian, and
see if you do not join yourself to Baal poor, and eat the offerings of
the dead!’

And with this encouraging sentence, the two parted for the night.



CHAPTER VIII: THE EAST WIND


As Hypatia went forth the next morning, in all her glory, with a crowd
of philosophers and philosophasters, students, and fine gentlemen,
following her in reverend admiration across the street to her
lecture-room, a ragged beggar-man, accompanied by a huge and
villainous-looking dog, planted himself right before her, and extending
a dirty hand, whined for an alms.

Hypatia, whose refined taste could never endure the sight, much less the
contact, of anything squalid and degraded, recoiled a little, and bade
the attendant slave get rid of the man with a coin. Several of the
younger gentlemen, however, considered themselves adepts in that noble
art of ‘upsetting’ then in vogue in the African universities, to which
we all have reason enough to be thankful, seeing that it drove Saint
Augustine from Carthage to Rome; and they, in compliance with the usual
fashion of tormenting any simple creature who came in their way by
mystification and insult, commenced a series of personal witticisms,
which the beggar bore stoically enough. The coin was offered him, but
he blandly put aside the hand of the giver, and keeping his place on the
pavement, seemed inclined to dispute Hypatia’s farther passage.

‘What do you want? Send the wretch and his frightful dog away,
gentlemen!’ said the poor philosopher in some trepidation.

‘I know that dog,’ said one of them; ‘it is Aben-Ezra’s. Where did you
find it before it was lost, you rascal.’

‘Where your mother found you when she palmed you off upon her goodman,
my child--in the slave-market. Fair Sybil, have you already forgotten
your humblest pupil, as these young dogs have, who are already trying to
upset their master and instructor in the angelic science of bullying?’

And the beggar, lifting his broad straw hat, disclosed the features of
Raphael Aben-Ezra. Hypatia recoiled with a shriek of surprise.

‘Ah! you are astonished. At what, I pray?’

‘To see you, sir, thus!’

‘Why, then? You have been preaching to us all a long time the glory of
abstraction from the allurements of sense. It augurs ill, surely, for
your estimate either of your pupils or of your own eloquence, if you are
so struck with consternation because one of them has actually at last
obeyed you.’

‘What is the meaning of this masquerade, most excellent sir?’ asked
Hypatia and a dozen voices beside.

‘Ask Cyril. I am on my way to Italy, in the character of the New
Diogenes, to look, like him, for a man. When I have found one, I shall
feel great pleasure in returning to acquaint you with the amazing news.
Farewell! I wished to look once more at a certain countenance, though
I have turned, as you see, Cynic; and intend henceforth to attend no
teacher but my dog, who will luckily charge no fees for instruction; if
she did, I must go untaught, for my ancestral wealth made itself wings
yesterday morning. You are aware, doubtless, of the Plebiscitum against
the Jews, which was carried into effect under the auspices of a certain
holy tribune of the people?’

‘Infamous!’

‘And dangerous, my dear lady. Success is inspiriting.... and Theon’s
house is quite as easily sacked, as the Jews’ quarter.... Beware.’

‘Come, come, Aben-Ezra,’ cried the young men; ‘you are far too good
company for us to lose you for that rascally patriarch’s fancy. We will
make a subscription for you, eh? And you shall live with each of us,
month and month about. We shall quite lose the trick of joking without
you.’

‘Thank you, gentlemen. But really you have been my butts far too long
for me to think of becoming yours. Madam, one word in private before I
go.’

Hypatia leant forward, and speaking in Syriac, whispered hurriedly--

‘Oh, stay, sir, I beseech you: You are the wisest of my pupils--perhaps
my only true pupil.... My father will find some concealment for you from
these wretches; and if you need money, remember, he is your debtor. We
have never repaid you the gold which--’

‘Fairest Muse, that was but my entrance-fee to Parnassus. It is I who
am in your debt; and I have brought my arrears, in the form of this
opal ring. As for shelter near you,’ he went on, lowering his voice, and
speaking like her, in Syriac--‘Hypatia the Gentile is far too lovely
for the peace of mind of Raphael the Jew.’ And he drew from his finger
Miriam’s ring and offered it.

‘Impossible!’ said Hypatia, blushing scarlet: ‘I cannot accept it.’

‘I beseech you. It is the last earthly burden I have, except this
snail’s prison of flesh and blood. My dagger will open a crack through
that when it becomes intolerable. But as I do not intend to leave my
shell, if I can help it, except just when and how I choose, and as, if
I take this ring with me, some of Heraclian’s Circumcellions will
assuredly knock my brains out for the sake of it-I must entreat.’

‘Never! Can you not sell the ring, and escape to Synesius? He will give
you shelter.’

‘The hospitable hurricane! Shelter, yes; but rest, none. As soon pitch
my tent in the crater of Aetna. Why, he will be trying day and night to
convert me to that eclectic farrago of his, which he calls philosophic
Christianity. Well, if you will not have the ring, it is soon disposed
of. We Easterns know how to be magnificent, and vanish as the lords of
the world ought.’

And he turned to the philosophic crowd.

‘Here, gentlemen of Alexandria! Does any gay youth wish to pay his
debts once and for all?--Behold the Rainbow of Solomon, an opal such
as Alexandria never saw before, which would buy any one of you, and his
Macedonian papa, and his Macedonian mamma, and his Macedonian sisters,
and horses, and parrots, and peacocks, twice over, in any slave-market
in the world. Any gentleman who wishes to possess a jewel worth ten
thousand gold pieces, will only need to pick it out of the gutter into
which I throw it. Scramble for it, you young Phaedrias and Pamphili!
There are Laides and Thaides enough about, who will help you to spend
it.’

And raising the jewel on high, he was in the act of tossing it into the
street, when his arm was seized from behind, and the ring snatched
from his hand. He turned, fiercely enough, and saw behind him, her eyes
flashing fury and contempt, old Miriam.

Bran sprang at the old woman’s throat in an instant; but recoiled again
before the glare of her eye. Raphael called the dog off, and turning
quietly to the disappointed spectators--

‘It is all right, my luckless friends. You must raise money for
yourselves, after all; which, since the departure of my nation, will be
a somewhat more difficult matter than ever. The over-ruling destinies,
whom, as you all know so well when you are getting tipsy, not even
philosophers can resist, have restored the Rainbow of Solomon to its
original possessor. Farewell, Queen of Philosophy! When I find the man,
you shall hear of it. Mother, I am coming with you for a friendly word
before we part, though’ he went on, laughing, as the two walked away
together, ‘it was a scurvy trick of you to balk one of The Nation of the
exquisite pleasure of seeing those heathen dogs scrambling in the gutter
for his bounty.’

Hypatia went on to the Museum, utterly bewildered by this strange
meeting, and its still stranger end. She took care, nevertheless, to
betray no sign of her deep interest till she found herself alone in
her little waiting-room adjoining the lecture-hall; and there, throwing
herself into a chair, she sat and thought, till she found, to her
surprise and anger, the tears trickling down her cheeks. Not that her
bosom held one spark of affection for Raphael. If there had ever been
any danger of that the wily Jew had himself taken care to ward it off,
by the sneering and frivolous tone with which he quashed every approach
to deep feeling, either in himself or in others. As for his compliments
to her beauty, she was far too much accustomed to such, to be either
pleased or displeased by them. But she felt, as she said, that she
had lost perhaps her only true pupil; and more--perhaps her only true
master. For she saw clearly enough, that under that Silenus’ mask was
hidden a nature capable of--perhaps more than she dare think of. She had
always felt him her superior in practical cunning; and that morning had
proved to her what she had long suspected, that he was possibly also her
superior in that moral earnestness and strength of will for which she
looked in vain among the enervated Greeks who surrounded her. And even
in those matters in which he professed himself her pupil, she had long
been alternately delighted by finding that he alone, of all her school,
seemed thoroughly and instinctively to comprehend her every word, and
chilled by the disagreeable suspicion that he was only playing with her,
and her mathematics and geometry, and meta-physic and dialectic, like
a fencer practising with foils, while he reserved his real strength for
some object more worthy of him. More than once some paradox or question
of his had shaken her neatest systems into a thousand cracks, and
opened up ugly depths of doubt, even on the most seemingly-palpable
certainties; or some half-jesting allusion to those Hebrew Scriptures,
the quantity and quality of his faith in which he would never confess,
made her indignant at the notion that he considered himself in
possession of a reserved ground of knowledge, deeper and surer than her
own, in which he did not deign to allow her to share.

And yet she was irresistibly attracted to him. That deliberate and
consistent luxury of his, from which she shrank, he had always boasted
that he was able to put on and take off at will like a garment: and now
he seemed to have proved his words; to be a worthy rival of the great
Stoics of old time. Could Zeno himself have asked more from frail
humanity? Moreover, Raphael had been of infinite practical use to
her. He worked out, unasked, her mathematical problems; he looked out
authorities, kept her pupils in order by his bitter tongue, and drew
fresh students to her lectures by the attractions of his wit, his
arguments, and last, but not least, his unrivalled cook and cellar.
Above all he acted the part of a fierce and valiant watch-dog on her
behalf, against the knots of clownish and often brutal sophists, the
wrecks of the old Cynic, Stoic, and Academic schools, who, with venom
increasing, after the wont of parties, with their decrepitude, assailed
the beautifully bespangled card-castle of Neo-Platonism, as an empty
medley of all Greek philosophies with all Eastern superstitions. All
such Philistines had as yet dreaded the pen and tongue of Raphael, even
more than those of the chivalrous Bishop of Cyrene, though he certainly,
to judge from certain of his letters, hated them as much as he could
hate any human being; which was after all not very bitterly.

But the visits of Synesius were few and far between; the distance
between Carthage and Alexandria, and the labour of his diocese, and,
worse than all, the growing difference in purpose between him and
his beautiful teacher, made his protection all but valueless. And now
Aben-Ezra was gone too, and with him were gone a thousand plans and
hopes. To have converted him at last to a philosophic faith in the old
gods! To have made him her instrument for turning back the stream of
human error I... How often had that dream crossed her! And now, who
would take his place? Athanasius? Synesius in his good-nature might
dignify him with the name of brother, but to her he was a powerless
pedant, destined to die without having wrought any deliverance on
the earth, as indeed the event proved. Plutarch of Athens? He was
superannuated. Syrianus? A mere logician, twisting Aristotle to mean
what she knew, and he ought to have known, Aristotle never meant. Her
father? A man of triangles and conic sections. How paltry they all
looked by the side of the unfathomable Jew!--Spinners of charming
cobwebs..... But would the flies condescend to be caught in them?
Builders of pretty houses..... If people would but enter and live in
them! Preachers of superfine morality.... which their admiring pupils
never dreamt of practising. Without her, she well knew, philosophy must
die in Alexandria. And was it her wisdom--or other and more earthly
charms of hers--which enabled her to keep it alive? Sickening thought!
Oh, that she were ugly, only to test the power of her doctrines!

Ho! The odds were fearful enough already; she would be glad of any help,
however earthly and carnal. But was not the work hopeless? What she
wanted was men who could act while she thought. And those were just the
men whom she would find nowhere but--she knew it too well--in the hated
Christian priesthood. And then that fearful Iphigenia sacrifice loomed
in the distance as inevitable. The only hope of philosophy was in her
despair! ...............

She dashed away the tears, and proudly entered the lecture-hall, and
ascended the tribune like a goddess, amid the shouts of her audience....
What did she care for them? Would they do what she told them? She was
half through her lecture before she could recollect herself, and banish
from her mind the thought of Raphael. And at that point we will take the
lecture up. ...............

‘Truth? Where is truth but in the soul itself? Facts, objects, are but
phantoms matter-woven--ghosts of this earthly night, at which the soul,
sleeping here in the mire and clay of matter, shudders and names its own
vague tremors sense and perception. Yet, even as our nightly dreams stir
in us the suspicion of mysterious and immaterial presences, unfettered
by the bonds of time and space, so do these waking dreams which we call
sight and sound. They are divine messengers, whom Zeus, pitying
his children, even when he pent them in this prison-house of flesh,
appointed to arouse in them dim recollections of that real world of
souls whence they came. Awakened once to them; seeing, through the
veil of sense and fact, the spiritual truth of which they are but the
accidental garment, concealing the very thing which they make palpable,
the philosopher may neglect the fact for the doctrine, the shell for
the kernel, the body for the soul, of which it is but the symbol and the
vehicle. What matter, then, to the philosopher whether these names of
men, Hector or Priam, Helen or Achilles, were ever visible as phantoms
of flesh and blood before the eyes of men? What matter whether they
spoke or thought as he of Scios says they did? What matter, even,
whether he himself ever had earthly life? The book is here--the word
which men call his. Let the thoughts thereof have been at first whose
they may, now they are mine. I have taken them to myself, and thought
them to myself, and made them parts of my own soul. Nay, they were and
ever will be parts of me; for they, even as the poet was, even as I am,
are but a part of the universal soul. What matter, then, what myths
grew up around those mighty thoughts of ancient seers? Let others try
to reconcile the Cyclic fragments, or vindicate the Catalogue of ships.
What has the philosopher lost, though the former were proved to be
contradictory, and the latter interpolated? The thoughts are there, and
ours, Let us open our hearts lovingly to receive them, from whencesoever
they may have come. As in men, so in books, the soul is all with which
our souls must deal; and the soul of the book is whatsoever beautiful,
and true, and noble we can find in it. It matters not to us whether the
poet was altogether conscious of the meanings which we can find in him.
Consciously or unconsciously to him, the meanings must be there; for
were they not there to be seen, how could we see them? There are
those among the uninitiate vulgar--and those, too, who carry under
the philosophic cloak hearts still uninitiate--who revile such
interpretations as merely the sophistic and arbitrary sports of fancy.
It lies with them to show what Homer meant, if our spiritual meanings be
absurd; to tell the world why Homer is admirable, if that for which we
hold him up to admiration does not exist in him. Will they say that the
honour which he has enjoyed for ages was inspired by that which seems to
be his first and literal meaning? And more, will they venture to impute
that literal meaning to him? can they suppose that the divine soul of
Homer could degrade itself to write of actual and physical feastings,
and nuptials, and dances, actual nightly thefts of horses, actual
fidelity of dogs and swineherds, actual intermarriages between deities
and men, or that it is this seeming vulgarity which has won for him from
the wisest of every age the title of the father of poetry? Degrading
thought! fit only for the coarse and sense-bound tribe who can
appreciate nothing but what is palpable to sense and sight! As soon
believe the Christian scriptures, when they tell us of a deity who has
hands and feet, eyes and ears, who condescends to command the patterns
of furniture and culinary utensils, and is made perfect by being
born--disgusting thought!--as the son of a village maiden, and defiling
himself with the wants and sorrows of the lowest slaves!’

‘It is false! blasphemous! The Scriptures cannot lie!’ cried a voice
from the farther end of the room.

It was Philammon’s. He had been listening to the whole lecture; and yet
not so much listening as watching, in bewilderment, the beauty of the
speaker, the grace of her action, the melody of her voice, and last, but
not least, the maze of her rhetoric, as it glittered before his
mind’s eye like a cobweb diamonded with dew. A sea of new thoughts and
questions, if not of doubts, came rushing in at every sentence on his
acute Greek intellect, all the more plentifully and irresistibly
because his speculative faculty was as yet altogether waste and empty,
undefended by any scientific culture from the inrushing flood. For
the first time in his life he found himself face to face with the
root-questions of all thought--‘What am I, and where?’ ‘What can I
know?’ And in the half-terrified struggle with them, he had all but
forgotten the purpose for which he entered the lecture-hall. He
felt that he must break the spell. Was she not a heathen and a
false prophetess? Here was something tangible to attack; and half
in indignation at the blasphemy, half in order to force himself into
action, he had sprung up and spoken.

A yell arose. ‘Turn the monk out!’ ‘Throw the rustic through the window!’
cried a dozen young gentlemen. Several of the most valiant began to
scramble over the benches up to him; and Philammon was congratulating
himself on the near approach of a glorious martyrdom, when Hypatia’s
voice, calm and silvery, stifled the tumult in a moment.

‘Let the youth listen, gentlemen. He is but a monk and a plebeian, and
knows no better; he has been taught thus. Let him sit here quietly, and
perhaps we may be able to teach him otherwise.’

And without interrupting, even by a change of tone, the thread of her
discourse, she continued--

‘Listen, then, to a passage from the sixth book of the _Iliad_, in which
last night I seemed to see glimpses of some mighty mystery. You know it
well: yet I will read it to you; the very sound and pomp of that great
verse may tune our souls to a fit key for the reception of lofty wisdom.
For well said Abamnon the Teacher, that “the soul consisted first of
harmony and rhythm, and ere it gave itself to the body, had listened to
the divine harmony. Therefore it is that when, after having come into
a body, it hears such melodies as most preserve the divine footstep of
harmony, it embraces such, and recollects from them that divine harmony,
and is impelled to it, and finds its home in it, and shares of it as
much as it can share.”’

And therewith fell on Philammon’s ear, for the first time, the mighty
thunder-roll of Homer’s verse--

So spoke the stewardess: but Hector rushed From the house, the same way
back, down stately streets, Through the broad city, to the Scaian gates,
Whereby he must go forth toward the plain, There running toward him
came Andromache, His ample-dowered wife, Eetion’s child-- Eetion the
great-hearted, he who dwelt In Thebe under Placos, and the woods Of
Placos, ruling over Kilic men. His daughter wedded Hector brazen-helmed,
And met him then; and with her came a maid, Who bore in arms a
playful-hearted babe An infant still, akin to some fair star, Only and
well-loved child of Hector’s house, Whom he had named Scamandrios, but
the rest Astyanax, because his sire alone Upheld the weal of Ilion the
holy. He smiled in silence, looking on his child But she stood close to
him, with many tears; And hung upon his hand, and spoke, and called him.
‘My hero, thy great heart will wear thee out; Thou pitiest not thine
infant child, nor me The hapless, soon to be thy widow; The Greeks will
slay thee, falling one and all Upon thee: but to me were sweeter far,
Having lost thee, to die; no cheer to me Will come thenceforth, if thou
shouldst meet thy fate; Woes only: mother have I none, nor sire. For
that my sire divine Achilles slew, And wasted utterly the pleasant homes
Of Kilic folk in Thebe lofty-walled, And slew Eetion with the sword!
yet spared To strip the dead: awe kept his soul from that. Therefore he
burnt him in his graven arms, And heaped a mound above him; and around
The damsels of the Aegis-holding Zeus, The nymphs who haunt the upland,
planted elms. And seven brothers bred with me in the halls, All in one
day went down to Hades there; For all of them swift-foot Achilles slew
Beside the lazy kine and snow-white sheep. And her, my mother, who of
late was queen Beneath the woods of Places, he brought here Among his
other spoils; yet set her free Again, receiving ransom rich and great.
But Artemis, whose bow is all her joy, Smote her to death within her
father’s halls. Hector! so thou art father to me now, Mother, and
brother, and husband fair and strong! Oh, come now, pity me, and stay
thou here Upon the tower, nor make thy child an orphan And me thy wife
a widow; range the men Here by the fig-tree, where the city lies Lowest,
and where the wall can well be scaled; For here three times the best
have tried the assault Round either Ajax, and Idomeneus, And round the
Atridai both, and Tydeus’ son, Whether some cunning seer taught them
craft, Or their own spirit stirred and drove them on.’ Then spake tall
Hector, with the glancing helm All this I too have watched, my wife; yet
much I hold in dread the scorn of Trojan men And Trojan women with their
trailing shawls, If, like a coward, I should skulk from war. Beside, I
have no lust to stay; I have learnt Aye to be bold, and lead the van of
fight, To win my father, and myself, a name. For well I know, at heart
and in my thought, The day will come when Ilios the holy Shall lie in
heaps, and Priam, and the folk Of ashen-speared Priam, perish all. But
yet no woe to come to Trojan men, Nor even to Hecabe, nor Priam king,
Nor to my brothers, who shall roll in dust, Many and fair, beneath the
strokes of foes, So moves me, as doth thine, when thou shalt go Weeping,
led off by some brass-harnessed Greek, Robbed of the daylight of thy
liberty, To weave in Argos at another’s loom, Or bear the water of
Messeis home, Or Hypereia, with unseemly toils, While heavy doom
constrains thee, and perchance The folk may say, who see thy tears
run down, “This was the wife of Hector, best in fight At Ilium, of
horse-taming Trojan men.” So will they say perchance; while unto thee
Now grief will come, for such a husband’s loss, Who might have warded
off the day of thrall. But may the soil be heaped above my corpse Before
I hear thy shriek and see thy shame!’ He spoke, and stretched his arms
to take the child, But back the child upon his nurse’s breast Shrank
crying, frightened at his father’s looks. Fearing the brass and crest of
horse’s hair Which waved above the helmet terribly. Then out that father
dear and mother laughed, And glorious Hector took the helmet off, And
laid it gleaming on the ground, and kissed His darling child, and danced
him in his arm; And spoke in prayer to Zeus, and all the gods ‘Zeu,
and ye other gods, oh grant that this My child, like me, may grow the
champion here As good in strength, and rule with might in Troy That men
may say, “The boy is better far Than was his sire,” when he returns
from war, Bearing a gory harness, having slain A foeman, and his mothers
heart rejoice. Thus saying, on the hands of his dear wife He laid the
child; and she received him back In fragrant bosom, smiling through her
tears.

[Footnote: The above lines are not meant as a ‘translation,’ but as an
humble attempt to give the literal sense in some sort of metre. It would
be an act of arrogance even to aim at success where Pope and Chapman
failed. It is simply, I believe, impossible to render Homer into English
verse; because, for one reason among many, it is impossible to preserve
the pomp of sound, which invests with grandeur his most common words.
How can any skill represent the rhythm of Homeric Greek in a language
which--to take the first verse which comes to hand--transforms ‘boos
megaloio boeien,’ into ‘great ox’s hide’?]

‘Such is the myth. Do you fancy that in it Homer meant to hand down to
the admiration of ages such earthly commonplaces as a mother’s brute
affection, and the terrors of an infant? Surely the deeper insight of
the philosopher may be allowed without the reproach of fancifulness, to
see in it the adumbration of some deeper mystery!

‘The elect soul, for instance--is not its name Astyanax, king of the
city; by the fact of its ethereal parentage, the leader and lord of
all around it, though it knows it not? A child as yet, it lies upon
the fragrant bosom of its mother Nature, the nurse and yet the enemy
of man--Andromache, as the poet well names her, because she fights with
that being, when grown to man’s estate, whom as a child she nourished.
Fair is she, yet unwise; pampering us, after the fashion of mothers,
with weak indulgences; fearing to send us forth into the great realities
of speculation, there to forget her in the pursuit of glory, she would
have us while away our prime within the harem, and play for ever round
her knees. And has not the elect soul a father, too, whom it knows not?
Hector, he who is without--unconfined, unconditioned by Nature, yet its
husband?--the all-pervading, plastic Soul, informing, organising, whom
men call Zeus the lawgiver, Aether the fire, Osiris the lifegiver; whom
here the poet has set forth as the defender of the mystic city, the
defender of harmony, and order, and beauty throughout the universe?
Apart sits his great father--Priam, the first of existences, father
of many sons, the Absolute Reason; unseen, tremendous, immovable, in
distant glory; yet himself amenable to that abysmal unity which Homer
calls Fate, the source of all which is, yet in Itself Nothing, without
predicate, unnameable.

‘From It and for It the universal Soul thrills through the whole
Creation, doing the behests of that Reason from which it overflowed,
unwillingly, into the storm and crowd of material appearances; warring
with the brute forces of gross matter, crushing all which is foul and
dissonant to itself, and clasping to its bosom the beautiful, and all
wherein it discovers its own reflex; impressing on it its signature,
reproducing from it its own likeness, whether star, or daemon, or soul
of the elect:--and yet, as the poet hints in anthropomorphic language,
haunted all the while by a sadness--weighed down amid all its labours by
the sense of a fate--by the thought of that First One from whom the Soul
is originally descended; from whom it, and its Father the Reason before
it, parted themselves when they dared to think and act, and assert their
own free will.

‘And in the meanwhile, alas! Hector, the father, fights around, while
his children sleep and feed; and he is away in the wars, and they know
him not-know not that they the individuals are but parts of him the
universal. And yet at moments--oh! thrice blessed they whose celestial
parentage has made such moments part of their appointed destiny--at
moments flashes on the human child the intuition of the unutterable
secret. In the spangled glory of the summer night--in the roar of the
Nile-flood, sweeping down fertility in every wave--in the awful depths
of the temple-shrine--in the wild melodies of old Orphic singers, or
before the images of those gods of whose perfect beauty the divine
theosophists of Greece caught a fleeting shadow, and with the sudden
might of artistic ecstasy smote it, as by an enchanter’s wand, into an
eternal sleep of snowy stone--in these there flashes on the inner eye a
vision beautiful and terrible, of a force, an energy, a soul, an idea,
one and yet million-fold, rushing through all created things, like the
wind across a lyre, thrilling the strings into celestial harmony--one
life-blood through the million veins of the universe, from one great
unseen heart, whose thunderous pulses the mind hears far away, beating
for ever in the abysmal solitude, beyond the heavens and the galaxies,
beyond the spaces and the times, themselves but veins and runnels from
its all-teeming sea.


‘Happy, thrice happy! they who once have dared, even though breathless,
blinded with tears of awful joy, struck down upon their knees in utter
helplessness, as they feel themselves but dead leaves in the wind which
sweeps the universe--happy they who have dared to gaze, if but for an
instant, on the terror of that glorious pageant; who have not, like the
young Astyanax, clung shrieking to the breast of mother Nature, scared
by the heaven-wide flash of Hector’s arms, and the glitter of his
rainbow crest! Happy, thrice happy,! even though their eyeballs, blasted
by excess of light, wither to ashes in their sockets!--Were it not a
noble end to have seen Zeus, and die like Semele, burnt up by his
glory? Happy, thrice happy! though their mind reel from the divine
intoxication, and the hogs of Circe call them henceforth madmen and
enthusiasts. Enthusiasts they are; for Deity is in them, and they in
It. For the time, this burden of individuality vanishes, and recognising
themselves as portions of the universal Soul, they rise upward, through
and beyond that Reason from whence the soul proceeds, to the fount of
all--the ineffable and Supreme One--and seeing It, become by that act
portions of Its essence. They speak no more, but It speaks in them, and
their whole being, transmuted by that glorious sunlight into whose rays
they have dared, like the eagle, to gaze without shrinking, becomes an
harmonious vehicle for the words of Deity, and passive itself, utters
the secrets of the immortal gods! What wonder if to the brute mass they
seem as dreamers? Be it so.... Smile if you will. But ask me not to
teach you things unspeakable, above all sciences, which the word-battle
of dialectic, the discursive struggles of reason, can never reach, but
which must be seen only, and when seen confessed to be unspeakable.
Hence, thou disputer of the Academy!--hence, thou sneering
Cynic!--hence, thou sense-worshipping Stoic, who fanciest that the soul
is to derive her knowledge from those material appearances which she
herself creates!.... hence--; and yet no: stay and sneer if you will.
It is but a little time--a few days longer in this prison-house of
our degradation, and each thing shall return to its own fountain; the
blood-drop to the abysmal heart, and the water to the river, and the
river to the shining sea; and the dew-drop which fell from heaven shall
rise to heaven again, shaking off the dust-grains which weighed it down,
thawed from the earth-frost which chained it here to herb and sward,
upward and upward ever through stars and suns, through gods, and through
the parents of the gods, purer and purer through successive lives,
till it enters The Nothing, which is The All, and finds its home at
last.’....

And the speaker stopped suddenly, her eyes glistening with tears, her
whole figure trembling and dilating with rapture. She remained for a
moment motionless, gazing earnestly at her audience, as if in hopes of
exciting in them some kindred glow; and then recovering herself, added
in a more tender tone, not quite unmixed with sadness--

‘Go now, my pupils. Hypatia has no more for you to-day. Go now, and
spare her at least--woman as she is after all--the shame of finding
that she has given you too much, and lifted the veil of Isis before
eyes which are not enough purified to behold the glory of the
goddess.--Farewell!’

She ended: and Philammon, the moment that the spell of her voice was
taken off him, sprang up, and hurried out through the corridor into the
street....

So beautiful! So calm and merciful to him So enthusiastic towards all
which was noble! Had not she too spoken of the unseen world, of the hope
of immortality, of the conquest of the spirit over the flesh, just as a
Christian might have done? Was the gulf between them so infinite? If so,
why had her aspirations awakened echoes in his own heart--echoes too,
just such as the prayers and lessons of the Laura used to awaken? If the
fruit was so like, must not the root be like also?.... Could that be a
counterfeit? That a minister of Satan in the robes of an angel of
light? Light, at least, it was purity, simplicity, courage, earnestness,
tenderness, flashed out from eye, lip, gesture.... A heathen, who
disbelieved? .... What was the meaning of it all?

But the finishing stroke yet remained which was to complete the utter
confusion of his mind. For before he had gone fifty yards up the street,
his little friend of the fruit-basket, whom he had not seen since
he vanished under the feet of the mob in the gateway of the theatre,
clutched him by the arm, and burst forth, breathless with running--

‘The--gods--heap their favours--on those who--who least deserve them!
Rash and insolent rustic! And this is the reward of thy madness!’

‘Off with you!’ said Philammon, who had no mind at the moment to renew
his acquaintance with the little porter. But the guardian of parasols
kept a firm hold on his sheepskin.

‘Fool! Hypatia herself commands! Yes, you will see her, have speech with
her! while I--I the illuminated--I the appreciating--I the obedient--I
the adoring--who for these three years past have grovelled in the
kennel, that the hem of her garment might touch the tip of my little
finger--I--I--I--’

‘What do you want, madman?’

‘She calls for thee, insensate wretch! Theon sent me--breathless at once
with running and with envy--Go! favourite of the unjust gods!’

‘Who is Theon?’

‘Her father, ignorant! He commands thee to be at her
house--here-opposite--to-morrow at the third hour. Hear and obey! There
they are coming out of the Museum, and all the parasols will get wrong!
Oh, miserable me!’ And the poor little fellow rushed back again, while
Philammon, at his wits’ end between dread and longing, started off,
and ran the whole way home to the Serapeium, regardless of carriages,
elephants, and foot-passengers; and having been knocked down by a
surly porter, and left a piece of his sheepskin between the teeth of a
spiteful camel-neither of which insults he had time to resent-arrived at
the archbishop’s house, found Peter the Reader, and tremblingly begged
an audience from Cyril.



CHAPTER IX: THE SNAPPING OF THE BOW


Cyril heard Philammon’s story and Hypatia’s message with a quiet smile,
and then dismissed the youth to an afternoon of labour in the city,
commanding him to mention no word of what had happened, and to come to
him that evening and receive his order when he should have had time
to think over the matter. So forth Philammon went with his companions,
through lanes and alleys hideous with filth and poverty, compulsory
idleness and native sin. Fearfully real and practical it all was; but he
saw it all dimly as in a dream. Before his eyes one face was shining; in
his ears one silvery voice was ringing.... ‘He is a monk, and knows no
better.’.... True! And how should he know better? How could he tell
how much more there was to know, in that great new universe, in such
a cranny whereof his life had till now been past? He had heard but one
side already. What if there were two sides? Had he not a right-that is,
was it not proper, fair, prudent, that he should hear both, and then
judge?

Cyril had hardly, perhaps, done wisely for the youth in sending him out
about the practical drudgery of benevolence, before deciding for him
what was his duty with regard to Hypatia’s invitation. He had not
calculated on the new thoughts which were tormenting the young monk;
perhaps they would have been unintelligible to him bad he known of them.
Cyril had been bred up under the most stern dogmatic training, in those
vast monastic establishments, which had arisen amid the neighbouring
saltpetre quarries of Nitria, where thousands toiled in voluntary
poverty and starvation at vast bakeries, dyeries, brick-fields, tailors’
shops, carpenters’ yards, and expended the profits of their labour, not
on themselves, for they had need of nothing, but on churches, hospitals,
and alms. Educated in that world of practical industrial production as
well as of religious exercise, which by its proximity to the great
city accustomed monks to that world which they despised; entangled from
boyhood in the intrigues of his fierce and ambitious uncle Theophilus,
Cyril had succeeded him in the patriarchate of Alexandria without
having felt a doubt, and stood free to throw his fiery energy and clear
practical intellect into the cause of the Church without scruple, even,
where necessary, without pity. How could such a man sympathise with the
poor boy of twenty, suddenly dragged forth from the quiet cavern-shadow
of the Laura into the full blaze and roar of the world’s noonday? He,
too, was cloister-bred. But the busy and fanatic atmosphere of Nitria,
where every nerve of soul and body was kept on a life-long artificial
strain, without rest, without simplicity, without human affection, was
utterly antipodal to the government of the remote and needy, though
no less industrious commonwealths of Coenobites, who dotted the lonely
mountain-glens, far up into the heart of the Nubian desert. In such a
one Philammon had received, from a venerable man, a mother’s sympathy as
well as a father’s care; and now he yearned for the encouragement of a
gentle voice, for the greeting of a kindly eye, and was lonely and sick
at heart.... And still Hypatia’s voice haunted his ears, like a strain
of music, and would not die away. That lofty enthusiasm, so sweet and
modest in its grandeur--that tone of pity--in one so lovely it could
not be called contempt--for the many; that delicious phantom of being an
elect spirit, unlike the crowd.... ‘And am I altogether like the crowd?’
said Philammon to himself, as he staggered along under the weight of a
groaning fever-patient. ‘Can there be found no fitter work for me than
this, which any porter from the quay might do as well? Am I not somewhat
wasted on such toil as this? Have I not an intellect, a taste, a reason?
I could appreciate what she said.--Why should not my faculties be
educated? Why am I only to be shut out from knowledge? There is a
Christian Gnosis as well as a heathen one. What was permissible to
Clement’--he had nearly said to Origen, but checked himself on the
edge of heresy--‘is surely lawful for me! Is not my very craving for
knowledge a sign that I am capable of it? Surely my sphere is the study
rather than the street!’

And then his fellow-labourers--he could not deny it to himself--began to
grow less venerable in his eyes. Let him try as he might to forget the
old priest’s grumblings and detractions, the fact was before him. The
men were coarse, fierce, noisy.... so different from her! Their talk
seemed mere gossip--scandalous too, and hard-judging, most of it; about
that man’s private ambition, and that woman’s proud looks; and who had
stayed for the Eucharist the Sun-day before, and who had gone out after
the sermon; and how the majority who did not stay could possibly dare to
go, and how the minority who did not go could possibly dare to stay....
Endless suspicions, sneers, complaints.... what did they care for the
eternal glories and the beatific vision? Their one test for all men and
things, from the patriarch to the prefect, seemed to be--did he or it
advance the cause of the Church?--which Philammon soon discovered to
mean their own cause, their influence, their self-glorification. And the
poor boy, as his faculty for fault-finding quickened under the influence
of theirs, seemed to see under the humble stock-phrases in which they
talked of their labours of love, and the future reward of their present
humiliations, a deep and hardly-bidden pride, a faith in their
own infallibility, a contemptuous impatience of every man, however
venerable, who differed from their party on any, the slightest, matter.
They spoke with sneers of Augustine’s Latinising tendencies, and with
open execrations of Chrysostom, as the vilest and most impious of
schismatics; and, for aught Philammon knew, they were right enough. But
when they talked of wars and desolation past and impending, without a
word of pity for the slain and ruined, as a just judgment of Heaven
upon heretics and heathens; when they argued over the awful struggle
for power which, as he gathered from their words, was even then pending
between the Emperor and the Count of Africa, as if it contained but one
question of interest to them--would Cyril, and they as his bodyguard,
gain or lose power in Alexandria? and lastly, when at some mention of
Orestes, and of Hypatia as his counsellor, they broke out into open
imprecations of God’s curse, and comforted themselves with the prospect
of everlasting torment for both; he shuddered and asked himself
involuntarily--were these the ministers of a Gospel?--were these the
fruits of Christ’s Spirit?.... And a whisper thrilled through the inmost
depth of his soul--‘Is there a Gospel? Is there a Spirit of Christ?
Would not their fruits be different from these?’

Faint, and low, and distant, was that whisper, like the mutter of an
earthquake miles below the soil. And yet, like the earthquake-roll, it
had in that one moment jarred every belief, and hope, and memory of his
being each a hair’s-breadth from its place.... Only one hair’s-breadth.
But that was enough; his whole inward and outward world changed shape,
and cracked at every joint. What if it were to fall in pieces? His brain
reeled with the thought. He doubted his own identity. The very light of
heaven had altered its hue. Was the firm ground on which he stood after
all no solid reality, but a fragile shell which covered--what?

The nightmare vanished, and he breathed once more. What a strange dream!
The sun and the exertion must have made him giddy. He would forget all
about it.

Weary with labour, and still wearier with thought, he returned that
evening, longing and yet dreading to be permitted to speak with Hypatia.
He half hoped at moments that Cyril might think him too weak for it;
and the next, all his pride and daring, not to say his faith and hope,
spurred him on. Might he but face the terrible enchantress, and rebuke
her to her face! And yet so lovely, so noble as she looked! Could
he speak to her, except in tones of gentle warning, pity, counsel,
entreaty? Might he not convert her--save her? Glorious thought! to win
such a soul to the true cause! To be able to show, as the firstfruits of
his mission, the very champion of heathendom! It was worth while to have
lived only to do that; and having done it, to die.

The archbishop’s lodgings, when he entered them, were in a state of
ferment even greater than usual. Groups of monks, priests, parabolani,
and citizens rich and poor, were banging about the courtyard, talking
earnestly and angrily. A large party of monks fresh from Nitria, with
ragged hair and beards, and the peculiar expression of countenance which
fanatics of all creeds acquire, fierce and yet abject, self-conscious
and yet ungoverned, silly and yet sly, with features coarsened and
degraded by continual fasting and self-torture, prudishly shrouded from
head to heel in their long ragged gowns, were gesticulating wildly and
loudly, and calling on their more peaceable companions, in no measured
terms, to revenge some insult offered to the Church.

‘What is the matter?’ asked Philammon of a quiet portly citizen, who
stood looking up, with a most perplexed visage, at the windows of the
patriarch’s apartments.

‘Don’t ask me; I have nothing to do with it. Why does not his holiness
come out and speak to them? Blessed virgin, mother of God! that we were
well through it all!--’

‘Coward!’ bawled a monk in his ear. ‘These shopkeepers care for nothing
but seeing their stalls safe. Rather than lose a day’s custom, they
would give the very churches to be plundered by the heathen!’

‘We do not want them!’ cried another. ‘We managed Dioscuros and his
brother, and we can manage Orestes. What matter what answer he sends?
The devil shall have his own!’

‘They ought to have been back two hours ago: they are murdered by this
time.’

‘He would not dare to touch the archdeacon!’

‘He will dare anything. Cyril should never have sent them forth as lambs
among wolves. What necessity was there for letting the prefect know that
the Jews were gone? He would have found it out for himself fast enough,
the next time he wanted to borrow money.’

‘What is all this about, reverend sir?’ asked Philammon of Peter the
Reader, who made his appearance at that moment in the quadrangle,
walking with great strides, like the soul of Agamemnon across the meads
of Asphodel, and apparently beside himself with rage.

‘Ah! you here? You may go to-morrow, young fool! The patriarch can’t
talk to you. Why should he? Some people have a great deal too much
notice taken of them, in my opinion. Yes; you may go. If your head is
not turned already, you may go and get it turned to-morrow. We shall see
whether he who exalts himself is not abased, before all is over!’ And he
was striding away, when Philammon, at the risk of an explosion, stopped
him.

‘His holiness commanded me to see him, sir, before--’

Peter turned on him in a fury. ‘Fool! will you dare to intrude your
fantastical dreams on him at such a moment as this?’

‘He commanded me to see him,’ said Philammon, with the true soldierlike
discipline of a monk; ‘and see him I will in spite of any man. I believe
in my heart you wish to keep me from his counsels and his blessing.’

Peter looked at him for a moment with a right wicked expression, and
then, to the youth’s astonishment, struck him full in the face, and
yelled for help.

If the blow had been given by Pambo in the Laura a week before,
Philammon would have borne it. But from that man, and coming
unexpectedly as the finishing stroke to all his disappointment and
disgust, it was intolerable; and in an instant Peter’s long legs were
sprawling on the pavement, while he bellowed like a bull for all the
monks in Nitria.

A dozen lean brown hands were at Philammon’s throat as Peter rose.
‘Seize him! hold him!’ half blubbered he. ‘The traitor! the heretic! He
holds communion with heathens!’

‘Down with him!’ ‘Cast him out! Carry him to the archbishop!’ while
Philammon shook himself free, and Peter returned to the charge.

‘I call all good Catholics to witness! He has beaten an ecclesiastic in
the courts of the Lord’s house, even in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem!
And he was in Hypatia’s lecture-room this morning!’

A groan of pious horror rose. Philammon set his back against the wall.

‘His holiness the patriarch sent me.’

‘He confesses, he confesses! He deluded the piety of the patriarch into
letting him go, under colour of converting her; and even now he wants
to intrude on the sacred presence of Cyril, burning only with the carnal
desire that he may meet the sorceress in her house to-morrow!’

‘Scandal!’ ‘Abomination in the holy place!’ and a rush at the poor youth
took place.

His blood was thoroughly up. The respectable part of the crowd, as usual
in such cases, prudently retreated, and left him to the mercy of the
monks, with an eye to their own reputation for orthodoxy, not to mention
their personal safety; and he had to help himself as he could. He looked
round for a weapon. There was none. The ring of monks were baying at him
like hounds round a bear: and though he might have been a match for any
one of them singly, yet their sinewy limbs and determined faces warned
him that against such odds the struggle would be desperate.

‘Let me leave this court in safety! God knows whether I am a heretic;
and to Him I commit my cause! The holy patriarch shall know of your
iniquity. I will not trouble you; I give you leave to call me heretic,
or heathen, if you will, if I cross this threshold till Cyril himself
sends for me back to shame you.’

And he turned, and forced his way to the gate, amid a yell of derision
which brought every drop of, blood in his body into his cheeks. Twice,
as he went down the vaulted passage, a rush was made on him from behind,
but the soberer of his persecutors checked it. Yet he could not leave
them, young and hot-headed as he was, without one last word, and on the
threshold he turned.

‘You! who call yourselves the disciples of the Lord, and are more like
the demoniacs who abode day and night in the tombs, crying and cutting
themselves with stones--’

In an instant they rushed upon him; and, luckily for him, rushed also
into the arms of a party of ecclesiastics, who were hurrying inwards
from the street, with faces of blank terror.

‘He has refused!’ shouted the foremost. He declares war against the
Church of God!’

‘Oh, my friends,’ panted the archdeacon, ‘we are escaped like the bird
out of the snare of the fowler. The tyrant kept us waiting two hours at
his palace-gates, and then sent lictors out upon us, with rods and axes,
telling us that they were the only message which he had for robbers and
rioters.’

‘Back to the patriarch!’ and the whole mob streamed in again, leaving
Philammon alone in the street--and in the world.

Whither now?

He strode on in his wrath some hundred yards or more before he asked
himself that question. And when he asked it, he found himself in no
humour to answer it. He was adrift, and blown out of harbour upon a
shoreless sea, in utter darkness; all heaven and earth were nothing to
him. He was alone in the blindness of anger.

Gradually one fixed idea, as a light-tower, began to glimmer through the
storm.... To see Hypatia, and convert her. He had the patriarch’s leave
for that. That must be right. That would justify him--bring him back,
perhaps, in a triumph more glorious than any Caesar’s, leading captive,
in the fetters of the Gospel, the Queen of Heathendom. Yes, there was
that left, for which to live.

His passion cooled down gradually as he wandered on in the fading
evening light, up one street and down another, till he had utterly lost
his way. What matter? He should find that lecture-room to-morrow at
least. At last he found himself in a broad avenue, which he seemed to
know. Was that the Sun-gate in the distance? He sauntered carelessly
down it, and found himself at last on the great Esplanade, whither the
little porter had taken him three days before. He was close then to the
Museum, and to her house. Destiny had led him, unconsciously, towards
the scene of his enterprise. It was a good omen; he would go thither
at once. He might sleep upon her doorstep as well as upon any other.
Perhaps he might catch a glimpse of her going out or coming in, even
at that late hour. It might be well to accustom himself to the sight
of her. There would be the less chance of his being abashed to-morrow
before those sorceress eyes. And moreover, to tell the truth, his
self-dependence, and his self-will too, crushed, or rather laid to
sleep, by the discipline of the Laura, had started into wild life, and
gave him a mysterious pleasure, which he had not felt since he was a
disobedient little boy, of doing what he chose, right or wrong, simply
because he chose it. Such moments come to every free-willed creature.
Happy are those who have not, like poor Philammon, been kept by a hotbed
cultivation from knowing how to face them? But he had yet to learn,
or rather his tutors had to learn, that the sure path toward willing
obedience and manful self-restraint, lies not through slavery, but
through liberty.

He was not certain which was Hypatia’s house; but the door of the Museum
he could not forget. So there he sat himself down under the garden wall,
soothed by the cool night, and the holy silence, and the rich perfume of
the thousand foreign flowers which filled the air with enervating balm.
There he sat and watched, and watched, and watched in vain for some
glimpse of his one object. Which of the houses was hers? Which was the
window of her chamber! Did it look into the street? What business had
his fancy with woman’s chambers?.... But that one open window, with the
lamp burning bright inside--he could not help looking up to it--he could
not help fancying--hoping. He even moved a few yards to see better the
bright interior of the room. High up as it was, he could still discern
shelves of books--pictures on the walls. Was that a voice? Yes! a
woman’s voice--reading aloud in metre--was plainly distinguishable in
the dead stillness of the night, which did not even awaken a whisper in
the trees above his head. He stood, spellbound by curiosity.

Suddenly the voice ceased, and a woman’s figure came forward to the
window, and stood motionless, gazing upward at the spangled star-world
overhead, and seeming to drink in the glory, and the silence, and the
rich perfume.... Could it be she? Every pulse in his body throbbed
madly.... Could it be? What was she doing? He could not distinguish the
features; but the full blaze of the eastern moon showed him an upturned
brow, between a golden stream of glittering tresses which hid her
whole figure, except the white hands clasped upon her bosom.... Was she
praying? were these her midnight sorceries?....

And still his heart throbbed and throbbed, till he almost fancied she
must hear its noisy beat--and still she stood motionless, gazing upon
the sky, like some exquisite chryselephantine statue, all ivory and
gold. And behind her, round the bright room within, painting, books, a
whole world of unknown science and beauty.... and she the priestess of
it all....inviting him to learn of her and be wise! It was a temptation!
He would flee from it!--Fool that he was!--and it might not be she after
all!

He made some sudden movement. She looked down, saw him, and shutting
the blind, vanished for the night. In vain, now that the temptation had
departed, he sat and waited for its reappearance, half cursing himself
for having broken the spell. But the chamber was dark and silent
henceforth; and Philammon, wearied out, found himself soon wandering
back to the Laura in quiet dreams, beneath the balmy, semi-tropic night.



CHAPTER X: THE INTERVIEW


Philammon was aroused from his slumbers at sunrise the next morning by
the attendants who came in to sweep out the lecture-rooms, and wandered,
disconsolately enough, up and down the street; longing for, and yet
dreading, the three weary hours to be over which must pass before he
would be admitted to Hypatia. But he had tasted no food since noon the
day before: he had but three hours’ sleep the previous night, and
had been working, running, and fighting for two whole days without a
moment’s peace of body or mind. Sick with hunger and fatigue, and aching
from head to foot with his hard night’s rest on the granite-flags, he
felt as unable as man could well do to collect his thoughts or brace his
nerves for the coming interview. How to get food he could not guess; but
having two hands, he might at least earn a coin by carrying a load; so
he went down to the Esplanade in search of work. Of that, alas! there
was none. So he sat down upon the parapet of the quay, and watched the
shoals of sardines which played in and out over the marble steps below,
and wondered at the strange crabs and sea-locusts which crawled up and
down the face of the masonry, a few feet below the surface, scrambling
for bits of offal, and making occasional fruitless dashes at the nimble
little silver arrows which played round them. And at last his whole
soul, too tired to think of anything else, became absorbed in a mighty
struggle between two great crabs, who held on stoutly, each by a claw,
to his respective bunch of seaweed, while with the others they tugged,
one at the head and the other at the tail of a dead fish. Which would
conquer?.... Ay, which? And for five minutes Philammon was alone in the
world with the two struggling heroes.... Might not they be emblematic?
Might not the upper one typify Cyril?--the lower one Hypatia?--and the
dead fish between, himself?.... But at last the deadlock was suddenly
ended--the fish parted in the middle; and the typical Hypatia and Cyril,
losing hold of their respective seaweeds by the jerk, tumbled down, each
with its half-fish, and vanished head over heels into the blue depths in
so undignified a manner, that Philammon burst into a shout of laughter.

‘What’s the joke?’ asked a well-known voice behind him; and a hand
patted him familiarly on the back. He looked round, and saw the little
porter, his head crowned with a full basket of figs, grapes, and
water-melons, on which the poor youth cast a longing eye. ‘Well, my
young friend, and why are you not at church? Look at all the saints
pouring into the Caesareum there, behind you.’

Philammon answered sulkily enough something inarticulate.

‘Ho, ho! Quarrelled with the successor of the Apostles already? Has my
prophecy come true, and the strong meat of pious riot and plunder proved
too highly spiced for your young palate? Eh?’

Poor Philammon! Angry with himself for feeling that the porter was
right; shrinking from the notion of exposing the failings of his
fellow-Christians; shrinking still more from making such a jackanapes
his confidant: and yet yearning in his loneliness to open his heart to
some one, he dropped out, hint by hint, word by word, the events of the
past evening, and finished by a request to be put in the way of earning
his breakfast.

‘Earning your breakfast! Shall the favourite of the gods--shall the
guest of Hypatia--earn his breakfast, while I have an obol to share
with him? Base thought! Youth! I have wronged you. Unphilosophically I
allowed, yesterday morning, envy to ruffle the ocean of my intellect. We
are now friends and brothers, in hatred to the monastic tribe.’

‘I do not hate them, I tell you,’ said Philammon. ‘But these Nitrian
savages--’

‘Are the perfect examples of monkery, and you hate them; and therefore,
all greaters containing the less, you hate all less monastic monks--I
have not heard logic lectures in vain. Now, up! The sea woos our dusty
limbs: Nereids and Tritons, charging no cruel coin, call us to Nature’s
baths. At home a mighty sheat-fish smokes upon the festive board; beer
crowns the horn, and onions deck the dish; come then, my guest and
brother!’

Philammon swallowed certain scruples about becoming the guest of a
heathen, seeing that otherwise there seemed no chance of having anything
else to swallow; and after a refreshing plunge in the sea, followed the
hospitable little fellow to Hypatia’s door, where he dropped his daily
load of fruit, and then into a narrow by-street, to the ground-floor
of a huge block of lodgings with a common staircase, swarming with
children, cats, and chickens; and was ushered by his host into a little
room, where the savoury smell of broiling fish revived Philammon’s
heart.

‘Judith! Judith! where lingerest thou? Marble of Pentelicus! foam-flake
of the wine dark main! lily of the Mareotic lake! You accursed black
Andromeda, if you don’t bring the breakfast this moment, I’ll cut you in
two!’

The inner door opened, and in bustled, trembling, her hands full of
dishes, a tall lithe negress, dressed in true negro fashion, in a
snow-white cotton shift, a scarlet cotton petticoat, and a bright yellow
turban of the same, making a light in that dark place which would have
served as a landmark a mile off. She put the dishes down, and the porter
majestically waved Philammon to a stool; while she retreated, and stood
humbly waiting on her lord and master, who did not deign to introduce
to his guest the black beauty which composed his whole seraglio.... But,
indeed, such an act of courtesy would have been needless; for the first
morsel of fish was hardly safe in poor Philammon’s mouth, when the
regress rushed upon him, caught him by the head, and covered him with
rapturous kisses.

Up jumped the little man with a yell, brandishing a knife in one hand
and a leek in the other; while Philammon, scarcely less scandalised,
jumped up too, and shook himself free of the lady, who, finding it
impossible to vent her feelings further on his head, instantly changed
her tactics, and, wallowing on the floor, began frantically kissing his
feet.

‘What is this? before my face! Up, shameless baggage, or thou diest the
death!’ and the porter pulled her up upon her knees.

‘It is the monk! the young man I told you of, who saved me from the Jews
the other night! What good angel sent him here that I might thank him?’
cried the poor creature, while the tears ran down her black shining
face.

‘I am that good angel,’ said the porter, with a look of intense
self-satisfaction. ‘Rise, daughter of Erebus; thou art pardoned, being
but a female. What says the poet?--

‘“Woman is passion’s slave, while rightful lord O’er her and passion,
rules the nobler male.”

Youth! to my arms! Truly say the philosophers, that the universe is
magical in itself, and by mysterious sympathies links like to like. The
prophetic instinct of thy future benefits towards me drew me to thee as
by an invisible warp, hawser, or chain-cable, from the moment I beheld
thee. Thou went a kindred spirit, my brother, though thou knewest it
not. Therefore I do not praise thee--no, nor thank thee in the least,
though thou hast preserved for me the one palm which shadows my weary
steps--the single lotus-flower (in this case black, not white) which
blooms for me above the mud-stained ocean wastes of the Hylic Borboros.
That which thou hast done, thou hast done by instinct--by divine
compulsion--thou couldst no more help it than thou canst help eating
that fish, and art no more to be praised for it.’

‘Thank you,’ said Philammon.

‘Comprehend me. Our theory in the schools for such cases is this--has
been so at least for the last six months; similar particles, from one
original source, exist in you and me. Similar causes produce similar
effects; our attractions, antipathies, impulses, are therefore, in
similar circumstances, absolutely the same; and therefore you did the
other night exactly what I should have done in your case.’

Philammon thought the latter part of the theory open to question, but he
had by no means stopped eating when he rose, and his mouth was much too
full of fish to argue.

‘And therefore,’ continued the little man, ‘we are to consider ourselves
henceforth as one soul in two bodies. You may have the best of the
corporeal part of the division.... yet it is the soul which makes the
person. You may trust me, I shall not disdain my brotherhood. If any
one insults you henceforth, you have but to call me; and if I be within
hearing, why, by this right arm---’

And he attempted a pat on Philammon’s head, which, as there was a head
and shoulder’s difference between them, might on the whole have been
considered, from a theatric point of view, as a failure. Whereon the
little man seized the calabash of beer, and filling therewith a cow’s
horn, his thumb on the small end, raised it high in the air.

‘To the Tenth Muse, and to your interview with her!’

And removing his thumb, he sent a steady jet into his open mouth, and
having drained the horn without drawing breath, licked his lips, handed
it to Philammon, and flew ravenously upon the fish and onions.

Philammon, to whom the whole was supremely absurd, had no invocation to
make, but one which he felt too sacred for his present temper of mind:
so he attempted to imitate the little man’s feat, and, of course, poured
the beer into his eyes, and up his nose, and in his bosom, and finally
choked himself black in the face, while his host observed smilingly--

‘Aha, rustic! unacquainted with the ancient and classical customs
preserved in this centre of civilisation by the descendants of
Alexander’s heroes? Judith! clear the table. Now to the sanctuary of the
Muses!’

Philammon rose, and finished his meal by a monkish grace. A gentle and
reverent ‘Amen’ rose from the other end of the room. It was the negress.
She saw him look up at her, dropped her eyes modestly, and bustled away
with the remnants, while Philammon and his host started for Hypatia’s
lecture-room.

‘Your wife is a Christian?’ asked he when they were outside the door.

‘Ahem--! The barbaric mind is prone to superstition. Yet she is, being
but a woman and a negress, a good soul, and thrifty, though requiring,
like all lower animals, occasional chastisement. I married her on
philosophic grounds. A wife was necessary to me for several reasons: but
mindful that the philosopher should subjugate the material appetite,
and rise above the swinish desires of the flesh, even when his nature
requires him to satisfy them, I purposed to make pleasure as unpleasant
as possible. I had the choice of several cripples--their parents, of
ancient Macedonian family like myself, were by no means adverse; but I
required a housekeeper, with whose duties the want of an arm or a leg
might have interfered.’

‘Why did you not marry a scold?’ asked Philammon.

‘Pertinently observed: and indeed the example of Socrates rose luminous
more than once before my imagination. But philosophic calm, my dear
youth, and the peaceful contemplation of the ineffable? I could not
relinquish those luxuries. So having, by the bounty of Hypatia and her
pupils, saved a small suns, I went out bought me a negress, and hired
six rooms in the block we have just left, where I let lodgings to young
students of the Divine Philosophy.’

‘Have you any lodgers now?’

‘Ahem! Certain rooms are occupied by a lady of rank. The philosopher
will, above all things, abstain from babbling. To bridle the tongue,
is to--But there is a closet at your service; and for the hall of
reception, which you have just left--are you not a kindred and fraternal
spark? We can combine our meals, as our souls are already united.’

Philammon thanked him heartily for the offer, though he shrank from
accepting it; and in ten minutes more found himself at the door of the
very house which he had been watching the night before. It was she,
then, whom he had seen!.... He was handed over by a black porter to a
smart slave-girl, who guided him up, through cloisters and corridors,
to the large library, where five or six young men were sitting, busily
engaged, under Theon’s superintendence, in copying manuscripts and
drawing geometric diagrams.

Philammon gazed curiously at these symbols of a science unknown to
him, and wondered whether the day would ever come when he too would
understand their mysteries; but his eyes fell again as he saw the
youths staring at his ragged sheepskin and matted locks with undisguised
contempt. He could hardly collect himself enough to obey the summons of
the venerable old man, as he beckoned him silently out of the room, and
led him, with the titters of the young students ringing in his ears,
through the door by which he had entered, and along a gallery, till he
stopped and knocked humbly at a door.... She must be within! knocked
together under him. His heart sank and sank into abysses! Poor
wretch!.... He was half minded once to escape and dash into the
street.... but was it not his one hope, his one object?.... But why did
not that old man speak? If he would have but said something!.... If
he would only have looked cross, contemptuous!.... But with the same
impressive gravity, as of a man upon a business in which he had no
voice, and wished it to be understood that lie had none, the old man
silently opened the door, and Philammon followed.... There she was!
looking more glorious than ever; more than when glowing with the
enthusiasm of her own eloquence; more than when transfigured last night
in golden tresses and glittering moonbeams. There she sat, without
moving a finger, as the two entered. She greeted her father with a
smile, which made up for all her seeming want of courtesy to him, and
then fixed her large gray eyes full on Philammon.

‘Here is the youth, my daughter. It was your wish, you know; and I
always believe that you know best--’

Another smile put an end to this speech, and the old man retreated
humbly toward another door, with a somewhat anxious visage, and then
lingering and looking back, his hand upon the latch--

‘If you require any one, you know, you have only to call--we shall be
all in the library.’

Another smile; and the old man disappeared, leaving the two alone.

Philammon stood trembling, choking, his eyes fixed on the floor. Where
were all the fine things he had conned over for the occasion? He dared
not look up at that face, lest it should drive them out of his head. And
yet the more lie kept his eyes turned from the face, the more lie was
conscious of it, conscious that it was watching him; and the more all
the fine words were, by that very knowledge, driven out of his head....
When would she speak? Perhaps she wished him to speak first. It was her
duty to begin, for she had sent for him.... But still she kept silence,
and sat scanning him intently from head to foot, herself as motionless
as a statue; her hands folded together before her, over the manuscript
which lay upon her knee. If there was a blush on her cheek at her own
daring, his eyes swam too much to notice it.

When would the intolerable suspense end? She was, perhaps, as unwilling
to speak as he. But some one must strike the first blow: and, as often
happens, the weaker party, impelled by sheer fear, struck it, and broke
the silence in a tone half indignant, half apologetic--

‘You sent for me hither!’

‘I did. It seemed to me, as I watched you during my lecture, both before
and after you were rude enough to interrupt me, that your offence was
one of mere youthful ignorance. It seemed to me that your countenance
bespoke a nobler nature than that which the gods are usually pleased to
bestow upon monks. That I may now ascertain whether or not my surmises
were correct, I ask you for what purpose are you come hither?’

Philammon hailed the question as a godsend.--Now for his message! And
yet he faltered as he answered, with a desperate effort,--‘To rebuke you
for your sins.’

‘My sins! What sins?’ she asked, as she looked up with a stately, slow
surprise in those large gray eyes, before which his own glance sank
abashed, he knew not why. What sins?--He knew not. Did she look like
a Messalina? But was she not a heathen and a sorceress?--And yet he
blushed, and stammered, and hung down his head, as, shrinking at the
sound of his own words, he replied--


‘The foul sorceries--and profligacy worse than sorceries, in which, they
say--’ He could get no farther: for he looked up again and saw an awful
quiet smile upon that face. His words had raised no blush upon the
marble cheek.

‘They say! The bigots and slanderers; wild beasts of the desert, and
fanatic intriguers, who, in the words of Him they call their master,
compass heaven and earth to make one proselyte, and when they have found
him, make him two-fold more the child of hell than themselves. Go--I
forgive you: you are young, and know not yet the mystery of the world.
Science will teach you some day that the outward frame is the sacrament
of the soul’s inward beauty. Such a soul I had fancied your face
expressed; but I was mistaken. Foul hearts alone harbour such foul
suspicions, and fancy others to be what they know they might become
themselves. Go! Do I look like--? The very tapering of these fingers, if
you could read their symbolism, would give your dream the lie.’ And she
flashed full on him, like sun-rays from a mirror, the full radiance of
her glorious countenance.

Alas, poor Philammon! where were thy eloquent arguments, thy orthodox
theories then? Proudly he struggled with his own man’s heart of flesh,
and tried to turn his eyes away; the magnet might as well struggle to
escape from the spell of the north. In a moment, he knew not how, utter
shame, remorse, longing for forgiveness, swept over him, and crushed him
down; and he found himself on his knees before her, in abject and broken
syllables entreating pardon.

‘Go--I forgive you. But know before you go, that the celestial milk
which fell from Here’s bosom, bleaching the plant which it touched to
everlasting whiteness, was not more taintless than the soul of Theon’s
daughter.’

He looked up in her face as he knelt before her. Unerring instinct
told him that her words were true. He was a monk, accustomed to believe
animal sin to be the deadliest and worst of all sins--indeed, ‘the great
offence’ itself, beside which all others were comparatively venial:
where there was physical purity, must not all other virtues follow in
its wake? All other failings were invisible under the dazzling veil of
that great loveliness; and in his self-abasement he went on--

‘Oh, do not spurn me!--do not drive me away! I have neither friend,
home, nor teacher. I fled last night from the men of my own faith,
maddened by bitter insult and injustice--disappointed and disgusted with
their ferocity, narrowness, ignorance. I dare not, I cannot, I will not
return to the obscurity and the dulness of a Thebaid Laura. I have a
thousand doubts to solve, a thousand questions to ask, about that great
ancient world of which I know nothing--of whose mysteries, they say, you
alone possess the key! I am a Christian; but I thirst for knowledge....
I do not promise to believe you-I do not promise to obey you; but let me
hear! Teach me what you know, that I may compare it with what I
know.... If indeed’ (and he shuddered as he spoke the words) ‘I do know
anything!’

‘Have you forgotten the epithets which you used to me just now?’

‘No, no! But do you forget them; they were put into my mouth. I--I did
not believe them when I said them. It was agony to me; but I did it, as
I thought, for your sake--to save you. Oh, say that I may come and hear
you again! Only from a distance--in the very farthest corner of your
lecture-room. I will be silent; you shall never see me. But your words
yesterday awoke in me--no, not doubts; but still I must, I must hear
more, or be as miserable and homeless inwardly as I am in my outward
circumstances!’ And he looked up imploringly for consent.

‘Rise. This passion and that attitude are fitting neither for you nor
me.’

And as Philammon rose, she rose also, went into the library to her
father, and in a few minutes returned with him.

‘Come with me, young man,’ said he, laying his hand kindly enough on
Philammon’s shoulder.... ‘The rest of this matter you and I can settle;’
and Philammon followed him, not daring to look back at Hypatia, while
the whole room swam before his eyes.

‘So, so I hear you have been saying rude things to my daughter. Well,
she has forgiven you--’

‘Has she?’ asked the young monk, with an eager start.

‘Ah! you may well look astonished. But I forgive you too. It is lucky
for you, however, that I did not hear you, or else, old man as I am, I
can’t say what I might not have done. Ah! you little know, you little
know what she is.--and the old pedant’s eyes kindled with loving pride.
‘May the gods give you some day such a daughter!--that is, if you learn
to deserve it--as virtuous as she is wise, as wise as she is beautiful.
Truly they have repaid me for my labours in their service. Look, young
man! little as you merit it, here is a pledge of your forgiveness, such
as the richest and noblest in Alexandria are glad to purchase with
many an ounce of gold--a ticket of free admission to all her lectures
henceforth! Now go; you have been favoured beyond your deserts, and
should learn that the philosopher can practise what the Christian only
preaches, and return good for evil.’ And he put into Philammon’s hand
a slip of paper, and bid one of the secretaries show him to the outer
door.

The youths looked up at him from their writing as he passed, with faces
of surprise and awe, and evidently thinking no more about the absurdity
of his sheepskin and his tanned complexion; and he went out with a
stunned, confused feeling, as of one who, by a desperate leap, has
plunged into a new world. He tried to feel content; but he dare not. All
before him was anxiety, uncertainty. He had cut himself adrift; he was
on the great stream. Whither would it lead him? Well--was it not the
great stream? Had not all mankind, for all the ages, been floating on
it? Or was it but a desert-river, dwindling away beneath the fiery
sun, destined to lose itself a few miles on, among the arid sands? Were
Arsenius and the faith of his childhood right? And was the Old World
coming speedily to its death-throe, and the Kingdom of God at hand?
Or was Cyril right, and the Church Catholic appointed to spread, and
conquer, and destroy, and rebuild, till the kingdoms of this world had
become the kingdoms of God and of His Christ! If so, what use in this
old knowledge which he craved? And yet, if the day of the destruction of
all things were at hand, and the times destined to become worse and not
better, till the end-how could that be?....

‘What news?’ asked the little porter, who had been waiting for him at
the door all the while. ‘What news, O favourite of the gods!’

‘I will lodge with you, and labour with you. Ask me no more at present.
I am--I am--

‘Those who descended into the Cave of Trophonius, and beheld the
unspeakable, remained astonished for three days, my young friend--and so
will you!’ And they went forth together to earn their bread.

But what is Hypatia doing all this while, upon that cloudy Olympus,
where she sits enshrined far above the noise and struggle of man and his
work-day world?

She is sitting again, with her manuscripts open before her; but she is
thinking of the young monk, not of them.

‘Beautiful as Antinous!.... Rather as the young Phoebus himself, fresh
glowing from the slaughter of the Python. Why should not he, too, become
a slayer of Pythons, and loathsome monsters, bred from the mud of sense
and matter? So bold and earnest! I can forgive him those words for the
very fact of his having dared, here in my fathers house, to say them to
me.... And yet so tender, so open to repentance and noble shame!--That
is no plebeian by birth; patrician blood surely flows in those veins;
it shows out in every attitude, every tone, every motion of the hand
and lip. He cannot be one of the herd. Who ever knew one of them crave
after knowledge for its own sake?.... And I have longed so for one
real pupil! I have longed so to find one such man, among the effeminate
selfish triflers who pretend to listen to me. I thought I had found
one--and the moment that I had lost him, behold, I find another; and
that a fresher, purer, simpler nature than ever Raphael’s was at its
best. By all the laws of physiognomy--by all the symbolism of gesture
and voice and complexion--by the instinct of my own heart, that young
monk might be the instrument, the ready, valiant, obedient instrument,
for carrying out all my dreams. If I could but train him into a
Longinus, I could dare to play the part of a Zenobia, with him as
counseller.... And for my Odenatus--Orestes? Horrible!’

She covered her face with her hand a minute. ‘No!’ she said, dashing
away the tears--‘That--and anything--and everything for the cause of
Philosophy and the gods!’



CHAPTER XI: THE LAURA AGAIN


Not a sound, not a moving object, broke the utter stillness of the glen
of Scetis. The shadows of the crags, though paling every moment before
the spreading dawn, still shrouded all the gorge in gloom. A winding
line of haze slept above the course of the rivulet. The plumes of the
palm-trees hung motionless, as if awaiting in resignation the breathless
blaze of the approaching day. At length, among the green ridges of the
monastery garden, two gray figures rose from their knees, and began,
with slow and feeble strokes, to break the silence by the clatter of
their hoes among the pebbles.

‘These beans grow wonderfully, brother Aufugus. We shall be able to
sow our second crop, by God’s blessing, a week earlier than we did last
year.’

The person addressed returned no answer; and his companion, after
watching him for some time in silence, recommenced--

‘What is it, my brother? I have remarked lately a melancholy about you,
which is hardly fitting for a man of God.’

A deep sigh was the only answer. The speaker laid down his hoe, and
placing his hand affectionately on the shoulder of Aufugus, asked
again--

‘What is it, my friend? I will not claim with you my abbot’s right to
know the secrets of your heart: but surely that breast hides nothing
which is unworthy to be spoken to me, however unworthy I may be to hear
it!’

‘Why should I not be sad, Pambo, my friend? Does not Solomon say that
there is a time for mourning?’

‘True: but a time for mirth also.’

‘None to the penitent, burdened with the guilt of many sins.’

‘Recollect what the blessed Anthony used to say--“Trust not in thine own
righteousness, and regret not that which is past.”’

‘I do neither, Pambo.’

‘Do not be too sure of that. Is it not because thou art still trusting
in thyself, that thou dost regret the past, which shows thee that thou
art not that which thou wouldst gladly pride thyself on being?’

‘Pambo, my friend,’ said Arsenius solemnly, ‘I will tell thee all. My
sins are not yet past; for Honorius, my pupil, still lives, and in him
lives the weakness and the misery of Rome. My sins past? If they are,
why do I see rising before me, night after night, that train of accusing
spectres, ghosts of men slain in battle, widows and orphans, virgins of
the Lord shrieking in the grasp of barbarians, who stand by my bedside
and cry, “Hadst thou done thy duty, we had not been thus! Where is that
imperial charge which God committed to thee?”’.... And the old man hid
his face in his hands and wept bitterly.

Pambo laid his hand again tenderly on the weeper’s shoulder.

‘Is there no pride here, my brother? Who art thou, to change the fate of
nations and the hearts of emperors, which are in the hand of the King of
kings? If thou wert weak, and imperfect in thy work--for unfaithful, I
will warrant thee, thou wert never--He put thee there, because thou wert
imperfect, that so that which has come to pass might come to pass; and
thou bearest thine own burden only-and yet not thou, but He who bore it
for thee.’

‘Why then am I tormented by these nightly visions?’

‘Fear them not, friend. They are spirits of evil, and therefore lying
spirits. Were they good spirits they would speak to thee only in pity,
forgiveness, encouragement. But be they ghosts or demons, they must be
evil, because they are accusers, like the Evil One himself, the accuser
of the saints. He is the father of lies, and his children will be like
himself. What said the blessed Anthony? That a monk should not busy his
brain with painting spectres, or give himself up for lost; but rather be
cheerful, as one who knows that he is redeemed, and in the hands of the
Lord, where the Evil One has no power to hurt him. “For,” he used to
say, “the demons behave to us even as they find us. If they see us east
down and faithless, they terrify us still more, that they may plunge us
in despair. But if they see us full of faith, and joyful in the Lord,
with our souls filled with the glory which shall be, then they shrink
abashed, and flee away in confusion.” Cheer up, friend! such thoughts
are of the night, the hour of Satan and of the powers of darkness; and
with the dawn they flee away.’

‘And yet things are revealed to men upon their beds, in visions of the
night.’

‘Be it so. Nothing, at all events, has been revealed to thee upon thy
bed, except that which thou knowest already far better than Satan does,
namely, that thou art a sinner. But for me, my friend, though I doubt
not that such things are, it is the day, and not the night, which brings
revelations.’

‘How, then?’

‘Because by day I can see to read that book which is written, like the
Law given on Sinai, upon tables of stone, by the finger of God Himself.’

Arsenius looked up at him inquiringly. Pambo smiled.

‘Thou knowest that, like many holy men of old, I am no scholar, and knew
not even the Greek tongue, till thou, out of thy brotherly kindness,
taughtest it to me. But hast thou never heard what Anthony said to a
certain Pagan who reproached him with his ignorance of books? “Which is
first,” he asked, “spirit, or letter?--Spirit, sayest thou? Then know,
the healthy spirit needs no letters. My book is the whole creation,
lying open before me, wherein I can read, whensoever I please, the word
of God.”’

‘Dost thou not undervalue learning, my friend?’

‘I am old among monks, and have seen much of their ways; and among them
my simplicity seems to have seen this--many a man wearing himself with
study, and tormenting his soul as to whether he believed rightly this
doctrine and that, while he knew not with Solomon that in much learning
is much sorrow, and that while he was puzzling at the letter of God’s
message, the spirit of it was going fast and faster out of him.’

‘And how didst thou know that of such a man?’

‘By seeing him become a more and more learned theologian, and more and
more zealous for the letter of orthodoxy; and yet less and less loving
and merciful--less and less full of trust in God, and of hopeful
thoughts for himself and for his brethren, till he seemed to have
darkened his whole soul with disputations, which breed only strife,
and to have forgotten utterly the message which is written in that book
wherewith the blessed Anthony was content’ ‘Of what message dost thou
speak?’

‘Look,’ said the old abbot, stretching his hand toward the Eastern
desert, ‘and judge, like a wise man, for thyself!’

As he spoke, a long arrow of level light flashed down the gorge from
crag to crag, awakening every crack and slab to vividness and life. The
great crimson sun rose swiftly through the dim night-mist of the desert,
and as he poured his glory down the glen, the haze rose in threads and
plumes, and vanished, leaving the stream to sparkle round the rocks,
like the living, twinkling eye of the whole scene. Swallows flashed by
hundreds out of the cliffs, and began their air-dance for the day; the
jerboa hopped stealthily homeward on his stilts from his stolen meal
in the monastery garden; the brown sand-lizards underneath the stones
opened one eyelid each, and having satisfied themselves that it was
day, dragged their bloated bodies and whip-like tails out into the most
burning patch of gravel which they could find, and nestling together as
a further protection against cold, fell fast asleep again; the buzzard,
who considered himself lord of the valley, awoke with a long querulous
bark, and rising aloft in two or three vast rings, to stretch himself
after his night’s sleep, bung motionless, watching every lark which
chirruped on the cliffs; while from the far-off Nile below, the
awakening croak of pelicans, the clang of geese, the whistle of the
godwit and curlew, came ringing up the windings of the glen; and last
of all the voices of the monks rose chanting a morning hymn to some wild
Eastern air; and a new day had begun in Seetis, like those which went
before, and those which were to follow after, week after week, year
after year, of toil and prayer as quiet as its sleep.

‘What does that teach thee, Aufugus, my friend?’

Arsenius was silent.

‘To me it teaches this: that God is light, and in Him is no darkness at
all. That in His presence is life, and fulness of joy for evermore. That
He is the giver, who delights in His own bounty; the lover, whose mercy
is over all His works--and why not over thee, too, O thou of little
faith? Look at those thousand birds--and without our Father not one of
them shall fall to the ground: and art thou not of more value than many
sparrows, thou for whom God sent His Son to die?.... Ah, my friend, we
must look out and around to see what God is like. It is when we
persist in turning our eyes inward, and prying curiously over our own
imperfections, that we learn to make a God after our own image, and
fancy that our own darkness and hardness of heart are the patterns of
His light and love.’

‘Thou speakest rather as a philosopher than as a penitent Catholic.
For me, I feel that I want to look more, and not less, inward. Deeper
self-examination, completer abstraction, than I can attain even here,
are what I crave for. I long--forgive me, my friend--but I long more and
more, daily, for the solitary life. This earth is accursed by man’s sin:
the less we see of it, it seems to me, the better.’

‘I may speak as a philosopher, or as a heathen, for aught I know: yet it
seems to me that, as they say, the half loaf is better than none; that
the wise man will make the best of what he has, and throw away no lesson
because the book is somewhat torn and soiled. The earth teaches me thus
far already. Shall I shut my eyes to those invisible things of God which
are clearly manifested by the things which are made, because some
day they will be more clearly manifested than now? But as for more
abstraction, are we so worldly here in Scetis?’

‘Nay, my friend, each man has surely his vocation, and for each some
peculiar method of life is more edifying than another. In my case, the
habits of mind which I acquired in the world will cling to me in spite
of myself even here. I cannot help watching the doings of others,
studying their characters, planning and plotting for them, trying to
prognosticate their future fate. Not a word, not a gesture of this our
little family, but turns away my mind from the one thing needful.’

‘And do you fancy that the anchorite in his cell has fewer
distractions?’

‘What can he have but the supply of the mere necessary wants of life?
and them, even, he may abridge to the gathering of a few roots and
herbs. Men have lived like the beasts already, that they might at the
same time live like the angels--and why should not I also?’

‘And thou art the wise man of the world--the student of the hearts
of others--the anatomiser of thine own? Hast thou not found out that,
besides a craving stomach, man carries with him a corrupt heart? Many
a man I have seen who, in his haste to fly from the fiends without him,
has forgotten to close the door of his heart against worse fiends who
were ready to harbour within him. Many a monk, friend, changes his
place, but not the anguish of his soul. I have known those who, driven
to feed on their own thoughts in solitude, have desperately cast
themselves from cliffs or ripped up their own bodies, in the longing to
escape from thoughts, from which one companion, one kindly voice, might
have delivered them. I have known those, too, who have been so puffed up
by those very penances which were meant to humble them, that they have
despised all means of grace, as though they were already perfect, and
refusing even the Holy Eucharist, have lived in self-glorying dreams
and visions suggested by the evil spirits. One such I knew, who, in
the madness? of his pride, refused to be counselled by any mortal
man--saying that he would call no man master: and what befell him? He
who used to pride himself on wandering a day’s journey into the desert
without food or drink, who boasted that he could sustain life for three
months at a time only on wild herbs and the Blessed Bread, seized with
an inward fire, fled from his cell back to the theatres, the circus, and
the taverns, and ended his miserable days in desperate gluttony, holding
all things to be but phantasms, denying his own existence, and that of
God Himself.’

Arsenius shook his head.

‘Be it so. But my case is different. I have yet more to confess, my
friend. Day by day I am more and more haunted by the remembrance of
that world from which I fled. I know that if I returned I should feel
no pleasure in those pomps, which, even while I battened on them, I
despised. Can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing
women; or discern any longer what I eat or what I drink? And yet--the
palaces of those seven hills, their statesmen and their generals, their
intrigues, their falls, and their triumphs--for they might rise and
conquer yet!--for no moment are they out of my imagination,-no moment in
which they are not tempting me back to them, like a moth to the candle
which has already scorched him, with a dreadful spell, which I must at
last obey, wretch that I am, against my own will, or break by fleeing
into some outer desert, from whence return will be impossible!’

Pambo smiled.

‘Again, I say, this is the worldly-wise man, the searcher of hearts! And
he would fain flee from the little Laura, which does turn his thoughts
at times from such vain dreams, to a solitude where he will be utterly
unable to escape those dreams. Well, friend!--and what if thou art
troubled at times by anxieties and schemes for this brother and for
that? Better to be anxious for others than only for thyself. Better to
have something to love--even something to weep over--than to become in
some lonely cavern thine own world,--perhaps, as more than one whom I
have known, thine own God.’

‘Do you know what you are saying?’ asked Arsenius in a startled tone.

‘I say, that by fleeing into solitude a man cuts himself off from
all which makes a Christian man; from law, obedience, fellow-help,
self-sacrifice--from the communion of saints itself.’

‘How then?’

‘How canst thou hold communion with those toward whom thou canst show no
love? And how canst thou show thy love but by works of love?’

‘I can, at least, pray day and night for all mankind. Has that no
place--or rather, has it not the mightiest place--in the communion of
saints!

‘He who cannot pray for his brothers whom he does see, and whose sins
and temptations he knows, will pray but dully, my friend Aufugus, for
his brothers whom he does not see, or for anything else. And he who will
not labour for his brothers, the same will soon cease to pray for them,
or love them either. And then, what is written? “If a man love not his
brother whom he hath seen, how will he love God whom he hath not seen?”’

‘Again, I say, do you know whither your argument leads?’

‘I am a plain man, and know nothing about arguments. If a thing be true,
let it lead where it will, for it leads where God wills.’

‘But at this rate, it were better for a man to take a wife, and have
children, and mix himself up in all the turmoil of carnal affections, in
order to have as many as possible to love, and fear for, and work for.’

Pambo was silent for a while.

‘I am a monk and no logician. But this I say, that thou leavest not the
Laura for the desert with my good will. I would rather, had I my wish,
see thy wisdom installed somewhere nearer the metropolis--at Troe or
Canopus, for example--where thou mightest be at hand to fight the Lord’s
battles. Why wert thou taught worldly wisdom, but to use it for the good
of the Church? It is enough. Let us go.’

And the two old men walked homeward across the valley, little guessing
the practical answer which was ready for their argument in Abbot Pambo’s
cell, in the shape of a tall and grim ecclesiastic, who was busily
satisfying his hunger with dates and millet, and by no means refusing
the palm-wine, the sole delicacy of the monastery, which had been
brought forth only in honour of a guest.

The stately and courtly hospitality of Eastern manners, as well as the
self-restraining kindliness of monastic Christianity, forbade the abbot
to interrupt the stranger; and it was not till he had finished a hearty
meal that Pambo asked his name and errand.

‘My unworthiness is called Peter the Reader. I come from Cyril, with
letters and messages to the brother Aufugus.’

Pambo rose, and bowed reverentially.

‘We have heard your good report, sir, as of one zealously affected in
the cause of the Church Catholic. Will it please you to follow us to the
cell of Aufugus?’

Peter stalked after them with a sufficiently important air to the little
hut, and there taking from his bosom Cyril’s epistle, handed it to
Arsenius, who sat long, reading and re-reading with a clouded brow,
while Pambo watched him with simple awe, not daring to interrupt by a
question lucubrations which he considered of unfathomable depth.

‘These are indeed the last days,’ said Arsenius at length, ‘spoken of by
the prophet, when many shall run to and fro. So Heraclian has actually
sailed for Italy?’

‘His armament was met on the high seas by Alexandrian merchantmen, three
weeks ago.’

‘And Orestes hardens his heart more and more?’

‘Ay, Pharaoh that he is; or rather, the heathen woman hardens it for
him.’

‘I always feared that woman above all the schools of the heathen,’ said
Arsenius. ‘But the Count Heraclian, whom I always held for the wisest
as well as the most righteous of men! Alas!--alas! what virtue will
withstand, when ambition enters the heart!’

‘Fearful, truly,’ said Peter, ‘is that same lust of power: but for
him, I have never trusted him since he began to be indulgent to those
Donatists.’

‘Too true. So does one sin beget another.’

‘And I consider that indulgence to sinners is the worst of all sins
whatsoever.’

‘Not of all, surely, reverend sir?’ said Pambo humbly. But Peter, taking
no notice of the interruption, went on to Arsenius--

‘And now, what answer am I to bear back from your wisdom to his
holiness?’

‘Let me see--let me see. He might--it needs consideration--I ought to
know more of the state of parties. He has, of course, communicated with
the African bishops, and tried to unite them with him?’

‘Two months ago. But the stiff-necked schismatics are still jealous of
him, and hold aloof.’

‘Schismatics is too harsh a term, my friend. But has he sent to
Constantinople?’

‘He needs a messenger accustomed to courts. It was possible, he thought,
that your experience might undertake the mission.’

‘Me? Who am I? Alas! alas! fresh temptations daily! Let him send by
the hand of whom he will.... And yet--were I--at least in Alexandria--I
might advise from day to day.... I should certainly see my way
clearer.... And unforeseen chances might arise, too .... Pambo,
my friend, thinkest thou that it would be sinful to obey the Holy
Patriarch?’

‘Aha!’ said Pambo, laughing, ‘and thou art he who was for fleeing into
the desert an hour agone! And now, when once thou smellest the battle
afar off, thou art pawing in the valley, like the old war-horse. Go, and
God be with thee! Thou wilt be none the worse for it. Thou art too old
to fall in love, too poor to buy a bishopric, and too righteous to have
one given thee.’

‘Art thou in earnest?’

‘What did I say to thee in the garden? Go, and see our son, and send me
news of him.’

‘Ah! shame on my worldly-mindedness! I had forgotten all this time to
inquire for him. How is the youth, reverend sir?’

‘Whom do you mean?’

‘Philammon, our spiritual son, whom we sent down to you three months
ago,’ said Pambo. ‘Risen to honour he is, by this time, I doubt not?’

‘He? He is gone!’

‘Gone?’

‘Ay, the wretch, with the curse of Judas on him. He had not been with us
three days before he beat me openly in the patriarch’s court, cast off
the Christian faith, and fled away to the heathen woman, Hypatia, of
whom he is enamoured.’

The two old men looked at each other with blank and horror-stricken
faces.

‘Enamoured of Hypatia?’ said Arsenius at last.

‘It is impossible!’ sobbed Pambo. ‘The boy must have been treated
harshly, unjustly? Some one has wronged him, and he was accustomed
only to kindness, and could not bear it. Cruel men that you are, and
unfaithful stewards. The Lord will require the child’s blood at your
hands!’

‘Ay,’ said Peter, rising fiercely, that is the world’s justice! Blame
me, blame the patriarch, blame any and every one but the sinner. As if
a hot head and a hotter heart were not enough to explain it all! As if a
young fool had never before been bewitched by a fair face!’

‘Oh, my friends, my friends,’ cried Arsenius, ‘why revile each other
without cause? I, I only am to blame. I advised you, Pambo!--I sent
him--I ought to have known--what was I doing, old worldling that I am,
to thrust the poor innocent forth into the temptations of Babylon? This
comes of all my schemings and my plottings! And now his blood will be on
my head-as if I bad not sins enough to bear already, I must go and add
this over and above all, to sell my own Joseph, the son of my old age,
to the Midianites! Here, I will go with you--now--at once--I will not
rest till I find hint, clasp his knees till he pities my gray hairs! Let
Heraclian and Orestes go their way for aught I care--I will find him,
I say. O Absalom, my son! would to God I had died for thee, my son! my
son!’



CHAPTER XII: THE BOWER OF ACRASIA


The house which Pelagia and the Amal had hired after their return to
Alexandria, was one of the most splendid in the city. They had been now
living there three months or more, and in that time Pelagia’s taste had
supplied the little which it needed to convert it into a paradise
of lazy luxury. She herself was wealthy; and her Gothic guests,
overburdened with Roman spoils, the very use of which they could not
understand, freely allowed her and her nymphs to throw away for them the
treasures which they had won in many a fearful fight. What matter? If
they had enough to eat, and more than enough to drink, how could the
useless surplus of their riches be better spent than in keeping their
ladies in good humour?.... And when it was all gone....they would go
somewhere or other--who cared whither?--and win more. The whole world
was before them waiting to be plundered, and they would fulfil their
mission, whensoever it suited them. In the meantime they were in no
hurry. Egypt furnished in profusion every sort of food which could
gratify palates far more nice than theirs. And as for wine--few of them
went to bed sober from one week’s end to another. Could the souls of
warriors have more, even in the halls of Valhalla?

So thought the party who occupied the inner court of the house, one
blazing afternoon in the same week in which Cyril’s messenger had so
rudely broken in on the repose of the Scetis. Their repose, at least,
was still untouched. The great city roared without; Orestes plotted,
and Cyril counterplotted, and the fate of a continent hung--or seemed to
hang--trembling in the balance; but the turmoil of it no more
troubled those lazy Titans within, than did the roll and rattle of the
carriage-wheels disturb the parakeets and sunbirds which peopled, under
an awning of gilded wire, the inner court of Pelagia’s house. Why should
they fret themselves with it all? What was every fresh riot, execution,
conspiracy, bankruptcy, but a sign--that the fruit was growing ripe
for the plucking? Even Heraclian’s rebellion, and Orestes’ suspected
conspiracy, were to the younger and coarser Goths a sort of child’s
play, at which they could look on and laugh, and bet, from morning till
night; while to the more cunning heads, such as Wulf and Smid, they were
but signs of the general rottenness--new cracks in those great walls
over which they intended, with a simple and boyish consciousness of
power, to mount to victory when they chose.

And in the meantime, till the right opening offered, what was there
better than to eat, drink, and sleep? And certainly they had chosen
a charming retreat in which to fulfil that lofty mission. Columns
of purple and green porphyry, among which gleamed the white limbs of
delicate statues, surrounded a basin of water, fed by a perpetual jet,
which sprinkled with cool spray the leaves of the oranges and mimosas,
mingling its murmurs with the warblings of the tropic birds which
nestled among the branches.

On one side of the fountain, under the shade of a broad-leaved palmetto,
lay the Amal’s mighty limbs, stretched out on cushions, his yellow hair
crowned with vine-leaves, his hand grasping a golden cup, which had
been won from Indian Rajahs by Parthian Chosroos, from Chosroos by Roman
generals, from Roman generals by the heroes of sheepskin and horsehide;
while Pelagia, by the side of the sleepy Hercules-Dionysos, lay leaning
over the brink of the fountain, lazily dipping her fingers into the
water, and basking, like the gnats which hovered over its surface, in
the mere pleasure of existence.

On the opposite brink of the basin, tended each by a dark-eyed Hebe,
who filled the wine-cups, and helped now and then to empty them, lay the
especial friends and companions in arms of the Amal, Goderic the son
of Ermenric, and Agilmund the son of Cniva, who both, like the Amal,
boasted a descent from gods; and last, but not least, that most
important and all but sacred personage, Smid the son of Troll,
reverenced for cunning beyond the sons of men; for not only could he
make and mend all matters, from a pontoon bridge to a gold bracelet,
shoe horses and doctor them, charm all diseases out of man and beast,
carve runes, interpret war-omens, foretell weather, raise the winds, and
finally, conquer in the battle of mead-horns all except Wulf the son of
Ovida; but he had actually, during a sojourn among the half-civilised
Maesogoths, picked up a fair share of Latin and Greek, and a rough
knowledge of reading and writing.

A few yards off lay old Wulf upon his back, his knees in the air,
his hands crossed behind his head, keeping up, even in his sleep,
a half-conscious comment of growls on the following intellectual
conversation:--

‘Noble wine this, is it not?’

‘Perfect. Who bought it for us?’

‘Old Miriam bought it, at some great tax-farmer’s sale. The fellow was
bankrupt, and Miriam said she got it for the half what it was worth.’

‘Serve the penny-turning rascal right. The old vixen-fox took care, I’ll
warrant her, to get her profit out of the bargain.’

‘Never mind if she did. We can afford to pay like men, if we earn like
men.’

‘We shan’t afford it long, at this rate,’ growled Wulf.

‘Then we’ll go and earn more. I am tired of doing nothing.’

‘People need not do nothing, unless they choose,’ said Goderic. ‘Wulf
and I had coursing fit for a king, the other morning on the sand-hills.
I had had no appetite for a week before, and I have been as sharp-set as
a Danube pike ever since.’

‘Coursing? What, with those long-legged brush-tailed brutes, like a fox
upon stilts, which the prefect cozened you into buying.’

‘All I can say is, that we put up a herd of those--what do you call them
here--deer with goats’ horns?’

‘Antelopes?’

‘That’s it--and the curs ran into them as a falcon does into a skein of
ducks. Wulf and I galloped and galloped over those accursed sand-heaps
till the horses stuck fast; and when they got their wind again, we found
each pair of dogs with a deer down between them--and what can man want
more, if he cannot get fighting? You eat them, so you need not sneer.’

‘Well, dogs are the only things worth having, then, that this Alexandria
does produce.’

‘Except fair ladies!’ put in one of the girls.

‘Of course. I’ll except the women. But the men-’

‘The what? I have not seen a man since I came here, except a dock-worker
or two--priests and fine gentlemen they are all--and you don’t call them
men, surely?’

‘What on earth do they do, beside riding donkeys?’

‘Philosophise, they say.’

‘What’s that?’

‘I’m sure I don’t know; some sort of slave’s quill-driving, I suppose.’

‘Pelagia! do you know what philosophising is?’

‘No--and I don’t care.’

‘I do,’ quoth Agilmund, with a look of superior wisdom; ‘I saw a
philosopher the other day.’

‘And what sort of a thing was it?’

‘I’ll tell you. I was walking down the great street there, going to the
harbour; and I saw a crowd of boys--men they call them here--going into
a large doorway. So I asked one of them what was doing, and the fellow,
instead of answering me, pointed at my legs, and set all the other
monkeys laughing. So I boxed his ears, and he tumbled down.’

‘They all do so here, if you box their ears,’ said the Amal
meditatively, as if he had bit upon a great inductive law.

‘Ah,’ said Pelagia, looking up with her most winning smile, ‘they are
not such giants as you, who make a poor little woman feel like a gazelle
in a lion’s paw!’

‘Well--it struck me that, as I spoke in Gothic, the boy might not
have understood me, being a Greek. So I walked in at the door, to save
questions, and see for myself. And there a fellow held out his hand--I
suppose for money, So I gave him two or three gold pieces, and a box
on the ear, at which he tumbled down, of course, but seemed very well
satisfied. So I walked in.’

‘And what did you see?’

‘A great hall, large enough for a thousand heroes, full of these
Egyptian rascals scribbling with pencils on tablets. And at the farther
end of it the most beautiful woman I ever saw--with right fair hair
and blue eyes, talking, talking--I could not understand it; but the
donkey-riders seemed to think it very fine; for they went on looking
first at her, and then at their tablets, gaping like frogs in drought.
And, certainly, she looked as fair as the sun, and talked like an
Alruna-wife. Not that I knew what it was about, but one can see somehow,
you know.--So I fell asleep; and when I woke, and came out, I met some
one who understood me, and he told me that it was the famous maiden, the
great philosopher. And that’s what I know about philosophy.’

‘She was very much wasted then, on such soft-handed starvelings. Why
don’t she marry some hero?’

‘Because there are none here to marry,’ said Pelagia; ‘except some who
are fast netted, I fancy, already.’

‘But what do they talk about, and tell people to do, these philosophers,
Pelagia?’

‘Oh, they don’t tell any one to do anything--at least, if they do,
nobody ever does it, as far as I can see; but they talk about suns and
stars, and right and wrong, and ghosts and spirits, and that sort of
thing; and about not enjoying oneself too much. Not that I ever saw that
they were any happier than any one else.’

‘She must have been an Alruna-maiden,’ said Wulf, half to himself.

‘She is a very conceited creature, and I hate her,’ said Pelagia.

‘I believe you,’ said Wulf.

‘What is an Alruna-maiden?’ asked one of the girls.

‘Something as like you as a salmon is like a horse-leech. Heroes, will
you hear a saga?’

‘If it is a cool one,’ said Agilmund; ‘about ice, and pine-trees, and
snowstorms, I shall be roasted brown in three days more.’

‘Oh,’ said the Amal, ‘that we were on the Alps again for only two hours,
sliding down those snow-slopes on our shields, with the sleet whistling
about our ears! That was sport!’

‘To those who could keep their seat,’ said Goderic. ‘Who went head over
heels into a glacier-crack, and was dug out of fifty feet of snow, and
had to be put inside a fresh-killed horse before he could be brought to
life?’

‘Not you, surely,’ said Pelagia. ‘Oh, you wonderful creature! what
things you have done and suffered!’

‘Well,’ said the Amal, with a look of stolid self-satisfaction, ‘I
suppose I have seen a good deal in my time, eh?’

‘Yes, my Hercules, you have gone through your twelve labours, and saved
your poor little Hesione after them all, when she was chained to the
rock, for the ugly sea-monsters to eat; and she will cherish you, and
keep you out of scrapes now, for her own sake;’ and Pelagia threw her
arms round the great bull-neck, and drew it down to her.

‘Will you hear my saga?’ said Wulf impatiently.

‘Of course we will,’ said the Amal; ‘anything to pass the time.’

‘But let it be about snow,’ said Agilmund.

‘Not about Alruna-wives?’

‘About them, too,’ said Goderic; ‘my mother was one, so I must needs
stand up for them.’

‘She was, boy. Do you be her son. Now hear, Wolves of the Goths!’

And the old man took up his little lute, or as he would probably have
called it, ‘fidel,’ and began chanting to his own accompaniment.

Over the camp fires Drank I with heroes, Under the Donau bank Warm in
the snow-trench, Sagamen heard I there, Men of the Longbeards, Cunning
and ancient, Honey-sweet-voiced. Scaring the wolf-cub, Scaring the
horn-owl out, Shaking the snow-wreaths Down from the pine-boughs, Up
to the star-roof Rang out their song. Singing how Winil men Over the
icefloes Sledging from Scanland on Came unto Scoring; Singing of Gambara
Freya’s beloved. Mother of Ayo Mother of Ibor. Singing of Wendel men,
Ambri and Assi; How to the Winilfolk Went they with war-words-- ‘Few are
ye, strangers, And many are we; Pay us now toll and fee, Clothyarn, and
rings, and beeves; Else at the raven’s meal Bide the sharp bill’s doom.’

Clutching the dwarfs’ work then, Clutching the bullock’s shell, Girding
gray iron on, Forth fared the Winils all, Fared the Alruna’s sons, Ayo
and Ibor. Mad of heart stalked they Loud wept the women all, Loud the
Alruna-wife; Sore was their need.

Out of the morning land, Over the snowdrifts, Beautiful Freya came,
Tripping to Scoring. White were the moorlands, And frozen before her;
But green were the moorlands, And blooming behind her, Out of her golden
locks Shaking the spring flowers, Out of her garments Shaking the south
wind, Around in the birches Awaking the throstles, And making chaste
housewives all Long for their heroes home, Loving and love-giving, Came
she to Scoring. Came unto Gambara, Wisest of Valas-- ‘Vala, why weepest
thou Far in the wide-blue, High up in the Elfin-home, Heard I thy
weeping.’

‘Stop not thy weeping, Till one can fight seven, Sons have I, heroes
tall, First in the sword-play; This day at the Wendels’ hands Eagles
must tear them; While their mothers, thrall-weary, Must grind for the
Wendels’

Wept the Alruna-wife; Kissed her fair Freya-- ‘Far off in the morning
land High in Valhalla, A window stands open, Its sill is the snow-peaks,
Its posts are the water-spouts Storm rack its lintel, Gold cloud-flakes
above it Are piled for the roofing. Far up to the Elfin-home, High in
the wide-blue. Smiles out each morning thence Odin Allfather; From
under the cloud-eaves, Smiles out on the heroes, Smiles out on chaste
housewives all, Smiles on the brood-mares, Smiles on the smith’s work:
And theirs is the sword-luck, With them is the glory-- So Odin hath
sworn it--


     Who first in the morning
     Shall meet him and greet him.’


Still the Alruna wept-- ‘Who then shall greet him? Women alone are here:
Far on the moorlands Behind the war-lindens, In vain for the bill’s doom
Watch Winil heroes all, One against seven.’

Sweetly the Queen laughed-- ‘Hear thou my counsel now; Take to thee
cunning, Beloved of Freya. Take thou thy women-folk, Maidens and wives:
Over your ankles Lace on the white war-hose; Over your bosoms Link up
the hard mailnets; Over your lips Plait long tresses with cunning;--
So war-beasts full bearded King Odin shall deem you, When off the gray
sea-beach At sunrise ye greet him.’

Night’s son was driving His golden-haired horses up. Over the Eastern
firths High flashed their manes. Smiled from the cloud-eaves out
Allfather Odin, Waiting the battle-sport: Freya stood by him. ‘Who are
these heroes tall-- Lusty-limbed Longbeards? Over the swans’ bath
Why cry they to me? Bones should be crashing fast, Wolves should be
full-fed, Where’er such, mad-hearted, Swing hands in the sword-play.’

Sweetly laughed Freya-- ‘A name thou hast given them-- Shames neither
thee nor them, Well can they wear it. Give them the victory, First have
they greeted thee; Give them the victory, Yokefellow mine! Maidens and
wives are these-- Wives of the Winils; Few are their heroes And far on
the war-road, So over the swans’ bath They cry unto thee.’

Royally laughed he then; Dear was that craft to him, Odin Allfather,
Shaking the clouds. ‘Cunning are women all, Bold and importunate!
Longbeards their name shall be, Ravens shall thank them: Where the women
are heroes, What must the men be like? Theirs is the victory; No need of
me!’

[Footnote: This punning legend may be seen in Paul Warnefrid’s _Gesta
Langobardorum_. The metre and language are intended as imitations of
those of the earlier Eddaic poems.]

‘There!’ said Wulf, when the song was ended; ‘is that cool enough for
you?’

‘Rather too cool; eh, Pelagia?’ said the Amal, laughing.

‘Ay,’ went on the old man, bitterly enough, ‘such were your mothers; and
such were your sisters; and such your wives must be, if you intend to
last much longer on the face of the earth--women who care for something
better than good eating, strong drinking, and soft lying.’

‘All very true, Prince Wulf,’ said Agilmund, ‘but I don’t like the saga
after all. It was a great deal too like what Pelagia here says those
philosophers talk about--right and wrong, and that sort of thing.’

‘I don’t doubt it.’

‘Now I like a really good saga, about gods and giants, and the fire
kingdoms and the snow kingdoms, and the Aesir making men and women out
of two sticks, and all that.’

‘Ay,’ said the Amal, ‘something like nothing one ever saw in one’s
life, all stark mad and topsy-turvy, like one’s dreams when one has been
drunk; something grand which you cannot understand, but which sets you
thinking over it all the morning after.’

‘Well,’ said Goderic, ‘my mother was an Alruna-woman, so I will not be
the bird to foul its own nest. But I like to hear about wild beasts and
ghosts, ogres, and fire-drakes, and nicors--something that one could
kill if one had a chance, as one’s fathers had.’

‘Your fathers would never have killed nicors,’ said Wulf, ‘if they had
been--’

‘Like us--I know,’ said the Amal. ‘Now tell me, prince, you are old
enough to be our father; and did you ever see a nicor?’

‘My brother saw one, in the Northern sea, three fathoms long, with the
body of a bison-bull, and the head of a cat, and the beard of a man, and
tusks an ell long, lying down on its breast, watching for the fishermen;
and he struck it with an arrow, so that it fled to the bottom of the
sea, and never came up again.’

‘What is a nicor, Agilmund?’ asked one of the girls.

‘A sea-devil who eats sailors. There used to be plenty of them where our
fathers came from, and ogres too, who came out of the fens into the
hall at night, when the warriors were sleeping, to suck their blood, and
steal along, and steal along, and jump upon you--so!’

Pelagia, during the saga, had remained looking into the fountain, and
playing with the water-drops, in assumed indifference. Perhaps it was to
hide burning blushes, and something very like two hot tears, which fell
unobserved into the ripple. Now she looked up suddenly--

‘And of course you have killed some of these dreadful creatures,
Amalric?’

‘I never had such good luck, darling. Our forefathers were in such a
hurry with them, that by the time we were born, there was hardly one
left.’

‘Ay, they were men,’ growled Wulf.

‘As for me,’ went on the Amal, ‘the biggest thing I ever killed was a
snake in the Donau fens. How long was he, prince? You had time to see,
for you sat eating your dinner and looking on, while he was trying to
crack my bones.’

‘Four fathom,’ answered Wulf.

‘With a wild bull lying by him, which he had just killed. I spoilt his
dinner, eh, Wulf?’

‘Yes,’ said the old grumbler, mollified, ‘that was a right good fight.’

‘Why don’t you make a saga about it, then, instead of about right and
wrong, and such things?’

‘Because I am turned philosopher. I shall go and hear that Alruna-maiden
this afternoon.’

‘Well said. Let us go too, young men: it will pass the time, at all
events.’

‘Oh, no! no! no! do not! you shall not!’ almost shrieked Pelagia.

‘Why not, then, pretty one?’

‘She is a witch--she--I will never love you again if you dare to go.
Your only reason is that Agilmund’s report of her beauty.’

‘So? You are afraid of my liking her golden locks better than your black
ones?’

‘I? Afraid?’ And she leapt up, panting with pretty rage. ‘Come, we will
go too--at once--and brave this nun, who fancies herself too wise to
speak to a woman, and too pure to love a man! Lookout my jewels! Saddle
my white mule! We will go royally. We will not be ashamed of Cupid’s
livery, my girls--saffron shawl and all! Come, and let us see whether
saucy Aphrodite is not a match after all for Pallas Athene and her owl!’

And she darted out of the cloister.

The three younger men burst into a roar of laughter, while Wulf looked
with grim approval.

‘So you want to go and hear the philosopher, prince?’ said Smid.

‘Wheresoever a holy and a wise woman speaks, a warrior need not be
ashamed of listening. Did not Alaric bid us spare the nuns in Rome,
comrade? And though I am no Christian as he was, I thought it no shame
for Odin’s man to take their blessing; nor will I to take this one’s,
Smid, son of Troll.’



CHAPTER XIII: THE BOTTOM OF THE ABYSS


‘Here am I, at last!’ said Raphael Aben-Ezra to himself. ‘Fairly and
safely landed at the very bottom of the bottomless; disporting myself on
the firm floor of the primeval nothing, and finding my new element, like
boys when they begin to swim, not so impracticable after all. No man,
angel, or demon, can this day cast it in my teeth that I am weak enough
to believe or disbelieve any phenomenon or theory in or concerning
heaven or earth; or even that any such heaven, earth, phenomena,
or theories exist--or otherwise.... I trust that is a sufficiently
exhaustive statement of my opinions? .... I am certainly not dogmatic
enough to deny--or to assert either--that there are sensations.... far
too numerous for comfort .... but as for proceeding any further, by
induction, deduction, analysis, or synthesis, I utterly decline
the office of Arachne, and will spin no more cobwebs out of my
own inside--if I have any. Sensations? What are they, but parts of
oneself--if one has a self! What put this child’s fancy into one’s head,
that there is anything outside of one which produces them? You have
exactly similar feelings in your dreams, and you know that there is no
reality corresponding to them--No, you don’t! How dare you be dogmatic
enough to affirm that? Why should not your dreams be as real as your
waking thoughts? Why should not your dreams be the reality, and your
waking thoughts the dream? What matter which?

‘What matter indeed? Here have I been staring for years--unless that,
too, is a dream, which it very probably is--at every mountebank “ism”
 which ever tumbled and capered on the philosophic tight-rope; and they
are every one of them dead dolls, wooden, worked with wires, which are
_petitiones principii_.... Each philosopher begs the question in hand,
and then marches forward, as brave as a triumph, and prides himself--on
proving it all afterwards. No wonder that his theory fits the universe,
when he has first clipped the universe to fit his theory. Have I not
tried my hand at many a one--starting, too, no one can deny, with the
very minimum of clipping,.... for I suppose one cannot begin lower than
at simple “I am I”.... unless--which is equally demonstrable--at “I am
not I.” I recollect--or dream--that I offered that sweet dream, Hypatia,
to deduce all things in heaven and earth, from the Astronomics of
Hipparchus to the number of plumes in an archangel’s wing, from that one
simple proposition, if she would but write me out a demonstration of it
first, as some sort of [Greek expression] for the apex of my inverted
pyramid. But she disdained.... People are apt to disdain what they know
they cannot do.... “It was an axiom,” it was, “like one and one making
two.”.... How cross the sweet dream was, at my telling her that I did
not consider that any axiom either, and that one thing and one thing
seeming to us to be two things, was no more proof that they really were
two, and not three hundred and sixty-five, than a man seeming to be
an honest man, proved him not to be a rogue; and at my asking her,
moreover, when she appealed to universal experience, how she proved that
the combined folly of all fools resulted in wisdom!

‘“I am I” an axiom, indeed! What right have I to say that I am not any
one else? How do I know it? How do I know that there is any one else
for me not to be? I, or rather something, feel a number of sensations,
longings, thoughts, fancies--the great devil take them all--fresh ones
every moment, and each at war tooth and nail with all the rest; and
then on the strength of this infinite multiplicity and contradiction,
of which alone I am aware, I am to be illogical enough to stand up, and
say, “I by myself I,” and swear stoutly that I am one thing, when all I
am conscious of is the devil only knows how many things. Of all quaint
deductions from experience, that is the quaintest! Would it not be more
philosophical to conclude that I, who never saw or felt or heard this
which I call myself, am what I have seen, heard, and felt--and no more
and no less--that sensation which I call that horse, that dead man,
that jackass, those forty thousand two-legged jackasses who appear to be
running for their lives below there, having got hold of this same notion
of their being one thing each--as I choose to fancy in my foolish
habit of imputing to them the same disease of thought which I find in
myself--crucify the word!--The folly of my ancestors--if I ever had
any--prevents my having any better expression.... Why should I not be
all I feel--that sky, those clouds--the whole universe? Hercules! what
a creative genius my sensorium must be!--I’ll take to writing’ poetry--a
mock-epic, in seventy-two books, entitled “The Universe: or, Raphael
Aben-Ezra,” and take Homer’s Margites for my model. Homer’s? Mine! Why
must not the Margites, like everything else, have been a sensation of my
own? Hypatia used to say Homer’s poetry was a part of her.... only she
could not prove it.... but I have proved that the Margites is a part of
me.... not that I believe my own proof--scepticism forbid! Oh, would to
heaven that the said whole disagreeable universe were annihilated, if
it were only just to settle by fair experiment whether any of master “I”
 remained when they were gone! Buzzard and dogmatist! And how do you know
that that would settle it? And if it did--why need it be settled?....

‘I daresay there is an answer pat for all this. I could write a pretty
one myself in half an hour. But then I should not believe it .... nor
the rejoinder to that.... nor the demurrer to that again .... So.... I
am both sleepy and hungry.... or rather, sleepiness and hunger are me.
Which is it! Heigh-ho....’ and Raphael finished his meditation by a
mighty yawn.

This hopeful oration was delivered in a fitting lecture-room. Between
the bare walls of a doleful fire-scarred tower in the Campagna of Rome,
standing upon a knoll of dry brown grass, ringed with a few grim pines,
blasted and black with smoke; there sat Raphael Aben-Ezra, working out
the last formula of the great world problem--‘Given Self; to find God.’
Through the doorless stone archway he could see a long vista of the
plain below, covered with broken trees, trampled crops, smoking villas,
and all the ugly scars of recent war, far onward to the quiet purple
mountains and the silver sea, towards which struggled, far in the
distance, long dark lines of moving specks, flowing together, breaking
up, stopping short, recoiling back to surge forward by some fresh
channel, while now and then a glitter of keen white sparks ran through
the dense black masses.... The Count of Africa had thrown for the empire
of the world--and lost.

‘Brave old Sun!’ said Raphael, ‘how merrily he flashes off the
sword-blades yonder, and never cares that every tiny spark brings
a death-shriek after it! Why should he? It is no concern of his.
Astrologers are fools. His business is to shine; and on the whole, he
is one of my few satisfactory sensations. How now? This is questionably
pleasant!’

As he spoke, a column of troops came marching across the field, straight
towards his retreat.

‘If these new sensations of mine find me here, they will infallibly
produce in me a new sensation, which will render all further ones
impossible.... Well? What kinder thing could they do for me?.... Ay--but
how do I know that they would do it? What possible proof is there that
if a two-legged phantasm pokes a hard iron-gray phantasm in among my
sensations, those sensations will be my last? Is the fact of my turning
pale, and lying still, and being in a day or two converted into crows’
flesh, any reason why I should not feel? And how do I know that would
happen? It seems to happen to certain sensations of my eyeball--or
something else--who cares? which I call soldiers; but what possible
analogy can there be between what seems to happen to those single
sensations called soldiers, and what may or may not really happen to all
my sensations put together, which I call me? Should I bear apples if a
phantasm seemed to come and plant me? Then why should I die if another
phantasm seemed to come and poke me in the ribs?

‘Still I don’t intend to deny it.... I am no dogmatist. Positively the
phantasms are marching straight for my tower! Well, it may be safer
to run away, on the chance. But as for losing feeling,’ continued he,
rising and cramming a few mouldy crusts into his wallet, ‘that, like
everything else, is past proof. Why--if now, when I have some sort of
excuse for fancying myself one thing in one place, I am driven mad with
the number of my sensations, what will it be when I am eaten, and turned
to dust, and undeniably many things in many places.... Will not the
sensations be multiplied by--unbearable! I would swear at the thought,
if I had anything to swear by! To be transmuted into the sensoria of
forty different nasty carrion crows, besides two or three foxes, and a
large black beetle! I’ll run away, just like anybody else.... if anybody
existed. Come, Bran! ...............

‘Bran! where are you; unlucky inseparable sensation of mine? Picking up
a dinner already off these dead soldiers? Well, the pity is that this
foolish contradictory taste of mine, while it makes me hungry,
forbids me to follow your example. Why am I to take lessons from my
soldier-phantasms, and not from my canine one? Illogical! Bran! Bran!’
and he went out and whistled in vain for the dog.

‘Bran! unhappy phantom, who will not vanish by night or day, lying on
my chest even in dreams; and who would not even let me vanish, and solve
the problem--though I don’t believe there is any--why did you drag me
out of the sea there at Ostia? Why did you not let me become a whole
shoal of crabs? How did you know, or I either, that they may not be
very jolly fellows, and not in the least troubled with philosophic
doubts?.... But perhaps there were no crabs, but only phantasms of
crabs.... And, on the other hand, if the crab-phantasms give jolly
sensations, why should not the crow-phantasms? So whichever way it turns
out, no matter; and I may as well wait here, and seem to become crows,
as I certainly shall do.--Bran!.... Why should I wait for her? What
pleasure can it be to me to have the feeling of a four-legged, brindled,
lop-eared, toad-mouthed thing always between what seem to be my legs?
There she is! Where have you been, madam? Don’t you see I am in marching
order, with staff and wallet ready shouldered? Come!’

But the dog, looking up in his face as only dogs can look, ran toward
the back of the ruin, and up to him again, and back again, until he
followed her.

‘What’s this? Here is a new sensation with a vengeance! O storm and
cloud of material appearances, were there not enough of you already,
that you must add to your number these also? Bran! Bran! Could you find
no other day in the year but this, whereon to present my ears with the
squeals of--one--two--three--nine blind puppies?’

Bran answered by rushing into the hole where her new family lay tumbling
and squalling, bringing out one in her mouth, and laying it at his feet.

‘Needless, I assure you. I am perfectly aware of the state of the case
already. What! another? Silly old thing!--do you fancy, as the fine
ladies do, that burdening the world with noisy likenesses of your
precious self, is a thing of which to be proud? Why, she’s bringing out
the whole litter!.... What was I thinking of last? Ah--the argument was
self-contradictory, was it, because I could not argue without using
the very terms which I repudiated. Well.... And--why should it not be
contradictory; Why not? One must face that too, after all. Why should
not a thing be true and false also? What harm in a thing’s being false?
What necessity for it to be true? True? What is truth? Why should a
thing be the worse for being illogical? Why should there be any logic at
all? Did I ever see a little beast flying about with “Logic” labelled on
its back? What do I know of it, but as a sensation of my own mind--if I
have any? What proof is that that I am to obey it, and not it me? If a
flea bites me I get rid of that sensation; and if logic bothers me, I’ll
get rid of that too. Phantasms must be taught to vanish courteously.
One’s only hope of comfort lies in kicking feebly against the tyranny
of one’s own boring notions and sensations--every philosopher
confesses that--and what god is logic, pray, that it is to be the sole
exception?.... What, old lady? I give you fair warning, you must choose
this day, like any nun, between the ties of family and those of duty.’

Bran seized him by the skirt, and pulled him down towards the puppies;
took up one of the puppies and lifted it towards him; and then repeated
the action with another.

‘You unconscionable old brute! You don’t actually dare to expect the to
carry your puppies for you?’ and he turned to go.

Bran sat down on her tail and began howling.

‘Farewell, old dog! you have been a pleasant dream after all.... But if
you will go the way of all phantasms.’.... And he walked away.

Bran ran with him, leaping and barking; then recollected her family and
ran back; tried to bring them, one by one, in her mouth, and then to
bring them all at once; and failing sat down and howled.

‘Come, Bran! Come, old girl!’

She raced halfway up to him; then halfway back again to the puppies;
then towards him again: and then suddenly gave it up, and dropping
her tail, walked slowly back to the blind suppliants, with a deep
reproachful growl.

‘* * *!’ said Raphael with a mighty oath; ‘you are right after all! Here
are nine things come into the world, phantasms or not, there it is; I
can’t deny it. They are something, and you are something, old dog; or at
least like enough to something to do instead of it; and you are not I,
and as good as I, and they too, for aught I know, and have as good a
right to live as I; and by the seven planets and all the rest of it,
I’ll carry them!’

And he went back, tied up the puppies in his blanket, and set forth,
Bran barking, squeaking, wagging, leaping, running between his legs and
upsetting him, in her agonies of joy.

‘Forward! Whither you will, old lady! The world is wide. You shall be
my guide, tutor, queen of philosophy, for the sake of this mere common
sense of yours. Forward, you new Hypatia! I promise you I will attend no
lectures but yours this day!’

He toiled on, every now and then stepping across a dead body, or
clambering a wall out of the road, to avoid some plunging, shrieking
horse, or obscene knot of prowling camp followers, who were already
stripping and plundering the slain.... At last, in front of a large
villa, now a black and smoking skeleton, he leaped a wall, and found
himself landed on a heap of corpses.... They were piled up against the
garden fence for many yards. The struggle had been fierce there some
three hours before.

‘Put me out of my misery! In mercy kill me!’ moaned a voice beneath his
feet.

Raphael looked down; the poor wretch was slashed and mutilated beyond
all hope.

‘Certainly, friend, if you wish it,’ and he drew his dagger. The poor
fellow stretched out his throat, and awaited the stroke with a ghastly
smile. Raphael caught his eye; his heart failed him, and he rose.

‘What do you advise, Bran?’ But the dog was far ahead, leaping and
barking impatiently.

‘I obey,’ said Raphael; and he followed her, while the wounded man
called piteously and upbraidingly after him.

‘He will not have long to wait. Those plunderers will not be as
squeamish as I.... Strange, now! From Armenian reminiscences I should
have fancied myself as free from such tender weakness as any of
my Canaanite-slaying ancestors.... And yet by some mere spirit of
contradiction, I couldn’t kill that fellow, exactly because he asked me
to do it.... There is more in that than will fit into the great inverted
pyramid of “I am I.”. Never mind, let me get the dog’s lessons by heart
first. What next, Bran? Ah! Could one believe the transformation? Why,
this is the very trim villa which I passed yesterday morning, with the
garden-chairs standing among the flower-beds, just as the young ladies
had left them, and the peacocks and silver pheasants running about,
wondering why their pretty mistresses did not come to feed them. And
here is a trampled mass of wreck and corruption for the girls to find,
when they venture back from Rome, and complain how horrible war is for
breaking down all their shrubs, and how cruel soldiers must be to kill
and cook all their poor dear tame turtle-doves! Why not? Why should they
lament over other things--which they can just as little mend--and which
perhaps need no more mending? Ah! there lies a gallant fellow underneath
that fruit-tree!’

Raphael walked up to a ring of dead, in the midst of which lay,
half-sitting against the trunk of the tree, a tall and noble officer
in the first bloom of manhood. His casque and armour, gorgeously inlaid
with gold, were hewn and battered by a hundred blows; his shield was
cloven through and through; his sword broken in the stiffened hand which
grasped it still. Cut off from his troop, he had made his last stand
beneath the tree, knee-deep in the gay summer flowers, and there he lay,
bestrewn, as if by some mockery--or pity--of mother nature, with faded
roses, and golden fruit, shaken from off the boughs in that last deadly
struggle. Raphael stood and watched him with a sad sneer.

‘Well!--you have sold your fancied personality dear! How many dead
men?.... Nine.... Eleven! Conceited fellow! Who told you that your one
life was worth the eleven which you have taken?’

Bran went up to the corpse--perhaps from its sitting posture fancying it
still living--smelt the cold cheek, and recoiled with a mournful whine.

‘Eh? That is the right way to look at the phenomena, is it? Well, after
all, I am sorry for you.... almost like you.... All your wounds in
front, as a man’s should be. Poor fop! Lais and Thais will never curl
those dainty ringlets for you again! What is that bas-relief upon your
shield? Venus receiving Psyche into the abode of the gods!.... Ah! you
have found out all about Psyche’s wings by this time.... How do I
know that? And yet, why am I, in spite of my common sense--if I have
any--talking to you as you, and liking you, and pitying you, if you are
nothing now, and probably never were anything? Bran! What right had you
to pity him without giving your reasons in due form, as Hypatia would
have done? Forgive me, sir, however--whether you exist or not, I cannot
leave that collar round your neck for these camp-wolves to convert into
strong liquor.’

And as he spoke, he bent down, and detached, gently enough, a
magnificent necklace.

‘Not for myself, I assure you. Like Ate’s golden apple, it shall go to
the fairest. Here, Bran!’ And he wreathed the jewels round the neck
of the mastiff, who, evidently exalted in her own eyes by the burden,
leaped and barked forward again, taking, apparently as a matter of
course, the road back towards Ostia, by which they had come thither
from the sea. And as he followed, careless where he went, he continued
talking to himself aloud after the manner of restless self-discontented
men.

....’And then man talks big about his dignity and his intellect, and
his heavenly parentage, and his aspirations after the unseen, and the
beautiful, and the infinite--and everything else unlike himself. How
can he prove it? Why, these poor blackguards lying about are very fair
specimens of humanity.--And how much have they been bothered since they
were born with aspirations after anything infinite, except infinite sour
wine? To eat, to drink; to destroy a certain number of their species; to
reproduce a certain number of the same, two-thirds of whom will die in
infancy, a dead waste of pain to their mothers and of expense to their
putative sires.... and then--what says Solomon? What befalls them
befalls beasts. As one dies, so dies the other; so that they have all
one breath, and a man has no pre-eminence over a beast; for all is
vanity. All go to one place; all are of the dust, and turn to dust
again. Who knows that the breath of man goes upward, and that the breath
of the beast goes downward to the earth? Who, indeed, my most wise
ancestor? Not I, certainly. Raphael Aben-Ezra, how art thou better than
a beast? W hat pre-eminence hast thou, not merely over this dog, But
over the fleas whom thou so wantonly cursest? Man must painfully win
house, clothes, fire.... A pretty proof of his wisdom, when every flea
has the wit to make my blanket, without any labour of his own, lodge him
a great deal better than it lodges me! Man makes clothes, and the fleas
live in them.... Which is the wiser of the two?....

‘Ah, but--man is fallen.... Well--and the flea is not. So much better he
than the man; for he is what he was intended to be, and so fulfils the
very definition of virtue, which no one can say of us of the red-ochre
vein. And even if the old myth be true, and the man only fell, because
he was set to do higher work than the flea, what does that prove--but
that he could not do it?

‘But his arts and his sciences?.... Apage! The very sound of those
grown-children’s rattles turns me sick.... One conceited ass in a
generation increasing labour and sorrow, and dying after all even as
the fool dies, and ten million brutes and slaves, just where their
fore-fathers were, and where their children will be after them, to the
end of the farce.... The thing that has been, it is that which shall be;
and there is no new thing under the sun....

‘And as for your palaces, and cities, and temples.... look at this
Campagna, and judge. Flea-bites go down after a while--and so do they.
What are they but the bumps which we human fleas make in the old earth’s
skin?. Make them? We only cause them, as fleas cause flea-bites....
What are all the works of man, but a sort of cutaneous disorder in this
unhealthy earth-hide, and we a race of larger fleas, running about among
its fur, which we call trees? Why should not the earth be an animal? How
do I know it is not? Because it is too big? Bah! What is big, and
what is little? Because it has not the shape of one?.... Look into
a fisherman’s net, and see what forms are there! Because it does not
speak?.... Perhaps it has nothing to say, being too busy. Perhaps it
can talk no more sense than we.... In both cases it shows its wisdom by
holding its tongue. Because it moves in one necessary direction? ....
How do I know that it does? How can I tell that it is not flirting with
all the seven spheres at once, at this moment? But if it does--so much
the wiser of it, if that be the best direction for it. Oh, what a base
satire on ourselves and our notions of the fair and fitting, to say that
a thing cannot be alive and rational, just because it goes steadily on
upon its own road, instead of skipping and scrambling fantastically up
and down without method or order, like us and the fleas, from the cradle
to the grave! Besides, if you grant, with the rest of the world, that
fleas are less noble than we, because they are our parasites, then you
are bound to grant that we are less noble than the earth, because we are
its parasites. .... Positively, it looks more probable than anything
I have seen for many a day.... And, by the bye, why should not
earthquakes, and floods, and pestilences, be only just so many ways
which the cunning old brute earth has of scratching herself when the
human fleas and their palace and city bites get too troublesome?’

At a turn of the road he was aroused from this profitable meditation
by a shriek, the shrillness of which told him that it was a woman’s.
He looked up, and saw close to him, among the smouldering ruins of a
farmhouse, two ruffians driving before them a young girl, with her hands
tied behind her, while the poor creature was looking back piteously
after something among the ruins, and struggling in vain, bound as she
was, to escape from her captors and return.

‘Conduct unjustifiable in any fleas,--eh, Bran? How do I know that,
though? Why should it not be a piece of excellent fortune for her, if
she had but the equanimity to see it? Why--what will happen to her?
She will betaken to Rome, and sold as a slave.... And in spite of a few
discomforts in the transfer, and the prejudice which some persons have
against standing an hour on the catasta to be handled from head to foot
in the minimum of clothing, she will most probably end in being far
better housed, fed, bedizened, and pampered to her heart’s desire, than
ninety-nine out of a hundred of her sister fleas.... till she begins
to grow old.... which she must do in any case....And if she have not
contrived to wheedle her master out of her liberty, and to make tip a
pretty little purse of savings, by that time--why, it is her own fault.
Eh, Bran?’

But Bran by no means agreed with his view of the case; for after
watching the two ruffians, with her head stuck on one side, for a minute
or two, she suddenly and silently, after the manner of mastiffs, sprang
upon them, and dragged one to the ground.

‘Oh! that is the “fit and beautiful,” in this case, as they say in
Alexandria, is it? Well--I obey. You are at least a more practical
teacher than ever Hypatia was. Heaven grant that there may be no more of
them in the ruins!’

And rushing on the second plunderer, he laid him dead with a blow of his
dagger, and then turned to the first, whom Bran was holding down by the
throat.

‘Mercy, mercy!’ shrieked the wretch. ‘Life! only life!’

‘There was a fellow half a mile back begging me to kill him: with which
of you two am I to agree?--for you can’t both be right.’

‘Life! Only life!’

‘A carnal appetite, which man must learn to conquer,’ said Raphael,
as he raised the poniard..... In a moment it was over, and Bran and
he rose--Where was the girl? She had rushed back to the ruins, whither
Raphael followed her; while Bran ran to the puppies, which he had laid
upon a stone, and commenced her maternal cares.

‘What do you want, my poor girl?’ asked he in Latin. ‘I will not hurt
you.’

‘My father! My father!’

He untied her bruised and swollen wrists; and without stopping to thank
him, she ran to a heap of fallen stones and beams, and began digging
wildly with all her little strength, breathlessly calling ‘Father!’

‘Such is the gratitude of flea to flea! What is there, now, in the mere
fact of being accustomed to call another person father, and not
master, or slave, which should produce such passion as that?.... Brute
habit!.... What services can the said man render, or have rendered,
which make him worth--Here is Bran!.... What do you think of that, my
female philosopher?’

Bran sat down and watched too. The poor girl’s tender hands were
bleeding from the stones, while her golden tresses rolled down over
her eyes, and entangled in her impatient fingers; but still she worked
frantically. Bran seemed suddenly to comprehend the case, rushed to the
rescue, and began digging too, with all her might.

Raphael rose with a shrug, and joined in the work. ...............

‘Hang these brute instincts! They make one very hot. What was that?’

A feeble moan rose from under the stones. A human limb was uncovered.
The girl threw herself on the place, shrieking her father’s name.
Raphael put her gently back and exerting his whole strength, drew out
of the ruins a stalwart elderly man, in the dress of an officer of high
rank.

He still breathed. The girl lifted up his head and covered him with
wild kisses. Raphael looked round for water; found a spring and a broken
sherd, and bathed the wounded man’s temples till he opened his eyes and
showed signs of returning life.

The girl still sat by him, fondling her recovered treasure, and bathing
the grizzled face in holy tears.

‘It is no business of mine,’ said Raphael. ‘Come, Bran!’

The girl sprang up, threw herself at his feet, kissed his hands, called
him her saviour, her deliverer, sent by God.

‘Not in the least, my child. You must thank my teacher the dog, not me.’

And she took him at his word, and threw her soft arms round Bran’s Deck;
and Bran understood it, and wagged her tail, and licked the gentle face
lovingly.

‘Intolerably absurd, all this!’ said Raphael. ‘I must be going, Bran.’

‘You will not leave us? You surely will not leave an old man to die
here?’

‘Why not? What better thing could happen to him?’

‘Nothing,’ murmured the officer, who had not spoken before.

‘Ah, God! he is my father!’

‘Well?’

‘He is my father!’

‘Well?’

‘You must save him! You shall, I say!’ And she seized Raphael’s arm in
the imperiousness of her passion.

He shrugged his shoulders: but felt, he knew not why, marvellously
inclined to obey her.

‘I may as well do this as anything else, having nothing else to do.
Whither now, sir?’

‘Whither you will. Our troops are disgraced, our eagles taken. We are
your prisoners by right of war. We follow you.’

‘Oh, my fortune! A new responsibility! Why cannot I stir, without live
animals, from fleas upward, attaching themselves to me? Is it not
enough to have nine blind puppies at my back, and an old brute at my
heels, who will persist in saving my life, that I must be burdened over
and above with a respectable elderly rebel and his daughter? Why am I
not allowed by fate to care for nobody but myself? Sir, I give you
both your freedom. The world is wide enough for us all. I really ask no
ransom.’

‘You seem philosophically disposed, my friend.’

‘I? Heaven forbid! I have gone right through that slough, and come out
sheer on the other side. For sweeping the last lingering taint of it out
of me, I have to thank, not sulphur and exorcisms, but your soldiers and
their morning’s work. Philosophy is superfluous in a world where all are
fools.’

‘Do you include yourself under that title?’

‘Most certainly, my best sir. Don’t fancy that I make any exceptions. If
I can in any way prove my folly to you, I will do it.’

‘Then help me and my daughter to Ostia.’

‘A very fair instance. Well--my dog happens to be going that way; and
after all, you seem to have a sufficient share of human imbecility to
be a very fit companion for me. I hope, though, you do not set up for a
wise man!’

‘God knows--no! Am I not of Heraclian’s army?’

‘True; and the young lady here made herself so great a fool about you,
that she actually infected the very dog.’

‘So we three fools will forth together.’

‘And the greatest one, as usual, must help the rest. But I have nine
puppies in my family already. How am I to carry you and them?’

‘I will take them,’ said the girl; and Bran, after looking on at the
transfer with a somewhat dubious face, seemed to satisfy herself that
all was right, and put her head contentedly under the girl’s hand.

‘Eh? You trust her, Bran?’ said Raphael, in an undertone. ‘I must
really emancipate myself from your instructions if you require a similar
simplicity in me. Stay! there wanders a mule without a rider; we may as
well press into the service.’

He caught the mule, lifted the wounded man into the saddle, and the
cavalcade set forth, turning out of the highroad into a by-lane, which
the officer, who seemed to know the country thoroughly, assured would
lead them to Ostia by an unfrequented route.

‘If we arrive there before sundown, we are saved,’ said he.

‘And in the meantime,’ answered Raphael, ‘between the dog and this
dagger, which, as I take care to inform all comers, is delicately
poisoned, we may keep ourselves clear of marauders. And yet, what a
meddling fool I am!’ he went on to himself. ‘What possible interest can
I have in this uncircumcised rebel! The least evil is, that if we are
taken, which we most probably shall be, I shall be crucified for helping
to escape. But even if we get safe off--here is a fresh tie between me
and those very brother fleas, to be rid of whom I have chosen beggary
and starvation. Who knows where it may end? Pooh! The man is like other
men. He is certain, before the day is over, to prove ungrateful, or
attempt the mountebank-heroic, or give me some other excuse for bidding
good-evening. And in the meantime there is something quaint in the fact
of finding so sober a respectability, with a young daughter too, abroad
on this fool’s errand, which really makes me curious to discover with
what variety of flea I am to class him.’

But while Aben-Ezra was talking to himself about the father, he could
not help, somehow, thinking about the daughter. Again and again he
found himself looking at her. She was, undeniably, most beautiful. Her
features were not as regularly perfect as Hypatia’s, nor her stature so
commanding; but her face shone with a clear and joyful determination,
and with a tender and modest thoughtfulness, such as he had never beheld
before united in one countenance; and as she stepped along, firmly and
lightly, by her father’s side, looping up her scattered tresses as she
went, laughing at the struggles of her noisy burden, and looking up with
rapture at her father’s gradually brightening face, Raphael could
not help stealing glance after glance, and was surprised to find them
returned with a bright, honest, smiling gratitude, which met full-eyed,
as free from prudery as it was from coquetry.... ‘A lady she is,’ said
he to himself; ‘but evidently no city one. There is nature--or something
else, there, pure and unadulterated, without any of man’s additions or
beautifications.’ And as he looked, he began to feel it a pleasure
such as his weary heart had not known for many a year, simply to watch
her....

‘Positively there is a foolish enjoyment after all in making other fleas
smile.... Ass that I am! As if I had not drunk all that ditch-water cup
to the dregs years ago!’

They went on for some time in silence, till the officer, turning to
him--

‘And may I ask you, my quaint preserver, whom I would have thanked
before but for this foolish faintness, which is now going off, what and
who you are?’

‘A flea, sir--a flea--nothing more.’

‘But a patrician flea, surely, to judge by your language and manners?’

‘Not that exactly. True, I have been rich, as the saying is; I may be
rich again, they tell me, when I am fool enough to choose.’

‘Oh if we were but rich!’ sighed the girl.

‘You would be very unhappy, my dear young lady. Believe a flea who has
tried the experiment thoroughly.’

‘Ah! but we could ransom my brother! and now we can find no money till
we get back to Africa.’

‘And none then,’ said the officer, in a low voice. ‘You forget, my poor
child, that I mortgaged the whole estate to raise my legion. We must not
shrink from looking at things as they are.’

‘Ah! and he is prisoner! he will be sold for a slave--perhaps--ah!
perhaps crucified, for he is not a Roman! Oh, he will be crucified!’ and
she burst into an agony of weeping....Suddenly she dashed away her tears
and looked up clear and bright once more.

‘No! forgive me, father! God will protect His own!’

‘My dear young lady,’ said Raphael, ‘if you really dislike such
a prospect for your brother, and are in want of a few dirty coins
wherewith to prevent it, perhaps I may be able to find you them in
Ostia.’

She looked at incredulously, as her eye glanced over his rags, and then,
blushing, begged his pardon for her unspoken thoughts.

‘Well, as you choose to suppose. But my dog has been so civil to you
already, that perhaps she may have no objection to make you a present
of that necklace of hers. I will go to the Rabbis, and we will make all
right; so don’t cry. I hate crying; and the puppies are quite chorus
enough for the present tragedy.’

‘The Rabbis? Are you a Jew?’ asked the officer.

‘Yes, sir, a Jew. And you, I presume, a Christian: perhaps you may
have scruples about receiving--your sect has generally none about
taking--from one of our stubborn and unbelieving race. Don’t be
frightened, though, for your conscience; I assure you I am no more a Jew
at heart than I am a Christian.’

‘God help you then!’

‘Some one, or something, has helped me a great deal too much, for
three-and-thirty years of pampering. But, pardon me, that was a strange
speech for a Christian.’

‘You must be a good Jew, sir, before you can be a good Christian.’

‘Possibly. I intend to be neither--nor a good Pagan either. My dear sir,
let us drop the subject. It is beyond me. If I can be as good a brute
animal as my dog there--it being first demonstrated that it is good to
be good--I shall be very well content.’

The officer looked down on with a stately, loving sorrow. Raphael caught
his eye, and felt that he was in the presence of no common man.

‘I must take care what I say here, I suspect, or I shall be entangled
shortly in a regular Socratic dialogue.... And now, sir, may I return
your question, and ask who and what are you? I really have no intention
of giving you up to any Caesar, Antiochus, Tiglath-Pileser, or other
flea-devouring flea.... They will fatten well enough without your blood.
So I only ask as a student of the great nothing-in-general, which men
call the universe.’

‘I was prefect of a legion this morning. What I am now, you know as well
as I.’

‘Just what I do not. I am in deep wonder at seeing your hilarity, when,
by all flea-analogies, you ought to be either be howling your fate like
Achilles on the shores of Styx, or pretending to grin and bear it, as
I was taught to do when I played at Stoicism. You are not of that sect
certainly, for you confessed yourself a fool just now.’

‘And it would be long, would it not, before you made one of them do as
much? Well, be it so. A fool I am; yet, if God helps us as far as Ostia,
why should I not be cheerful?’

‘Why should you?’

‘What better thing can happen to a fool, than that God should teach that
he is one, when he fancied himself the wisest of the wise? Listen to
me, sir. Four mouths ago I was blessed with health, honour, lands,
friends--all for which the heart of man could wish. And if, for an
insane ambition, I have chosen to risk all those, against the solemn
warnings of the truest friend, and the wisest saint who treads this
earth of God’s--should I not rejoice to have it proved to me, even by
such a lesson as this, that the friend who never deceived me before was
right in this case too; and that the God who has checked and turned me
for forty years of wild toil and warfare, whenever I dared to do what
was right in the sight of my own eyes, has not forgotten me yet, or
given up the thankless task of my education?’

‘And who, pray, is this peerless friend?’

‘Augustine of Hippo.’

‘Humph! It had been better for the world in general, if the great
dialectician had exerted his powers of persuasion on Heraclian himself.’

‘He did so, but in vain.’

‘I don’t doubt it. I know the sleek Count well enough to judge what
effect a sermon would have upon that smooth vulpine determination of
his.... “An instrument in the hands of God, my dear brother.... We
must obey His call, even to the death,” etc. etc.’ And Raphael laughed
bitterly.

‘You know the Count?’

‘As well, sir, as I care to know any man.’

‘I am sorry for your eyesight, then, sir,’ said the Prefect severely,
‘if it has been able to discern no more than that in so august a
character.’

‘My dear sir, I do not doubt his excellence--nay, his inspiration. How
well he divined the perfectly fit moment for stabbing his old comrade
Stilicho! But really, as two men of the world, we must be aware by this
time that every man has his price.’....

‘Oh, hush! hush!’ whispered the girl. ‘You cannot guess how you pain
him. He worships the Count. It was not ambition, as he pretends, but
merely loyalty to him, which brought here against his will.’

‘My dear madam, forgive me. For your sake I am silent.’....

‘For her sake! A pretty speech for me! What next?’ said he to himself.
‘Ah, Bran, Bran, this is all your fault!’

‘For my sake! Oh, why not for your own sake? How sad to hear one--one
like you, only sneering and speaking evil!’

‘Why then? If fools are fools, and one can safely call them so, why not
do it?’

‘Ah,--if God was merciful enough to send down His own Son to die for
them, should we not be merciful enough not to judge their failings
harshly!’

‘My dear young lady, spare a worn-out philosopher any new anthropologic
theories. We really must push on a little faster, if we intend to reach
Ostia to-night.’

But, for some reason or other, Raphael sneered no more for a full
half-hour.

Long, however, ere they reached Ostia, the night had fallen; and their
situation began to be more than questionably safe. Now and then a wolf,
slinking across the road towards his ghastly feast, glided like a lank
ghost out of the darkness, and into it again, answering Bran’s growl by
a gleam of his white teeth. Then the voices of some marauding party rang
coarse and loud through the still night, and made them hesitate and stop
a while. And at last, worst of all, the measured tramp of an imperial
column began to roll like distant thunder along the plain below. They
were advancing upon Ostia! What if they arrived there before the routed
army could rally, and defend themselves long enough to re-embark!....
What if--a thousand ugly possibilities began to crowd up.

‘Suppose we found the gates of Ostia shut, and the Imperialists
bivouacked outside?’ said Raphael half to himself.

‘God would protect His own,’ answered the girl; and Raphael had no heart
to rob her of her hope, though he looked upon their chances of escape as
growing smaller and smaller every moment. The poor girl was weary; the
mule weary also; and as they crawled along, at a pace which made it
certain that the fast passing column would be at Ostia an hour before
them, to join the vanguard of the pursuers, and aid them in investing
the town, she had to lean again and again on Raphael’s arm. Her shoes,
unfitted for so rough a journey, bad been long since torn off, and her
tender feet were marking every step with blood. Raphael knew it by her
faltering gait; and remarked, too, that neither sigh nor murmur passed
her lips. But as for helping her, he could not; and began to curse
the fancy which had led to eschew even sandals as unworthy the
self-dependence of a Cynic.

And so they crawled along, while Raphael and the Prefect, each guessing
the terrible thoughts of the other, were thankful for the darkness which
hid their despairing countenances from the young girl; she, on the other
hand, chatting cheerfully, almost laughingly, to her silent father.

At last the poor girl stepped on some stone more sharp than usual--and,
with a sudden writhe and shriek, sank to the ground. Raphael lifted her
up, and she tried to proceed, but sank down again.... What was to be
done?

‘I expected this,’ said the Prefect, in a slow stately voice. ‘Hear me,
sir! Jew, Christian, or philosopher, God seems to have bestowed on you a
heart which I can trust. To your care I commit this girl--your property,
like me, by right of war. Mount her upon this mule. Hasten with
her--where you will--for God will be there also. And may He so deal with
you as you deal with her henceforth. An old and disgraced soldier can do
no more than die.’

And he made an effort to dismount; but fainting from his wounds, sank
upon the neck of the mule. Raphael and his daughter caught in their
arms.

‘Father! Father! Impossible! Cruel! Oh--do you think that I would have
followed you hither from Africa, against your own entreaties, to desert
you now?’

‘My daughter, I command!’

The girl remained firm and sound.

‘How long have you learned to disobey me? Lift the old disgraced man
down, sir, and leave to die in the right place--on the battlefield where
his general sent him.’

The girl sank down on the road in an agony of weeping. ‘I must help
myself, I see,’ said her father, dropping to the ground. ‘Authority
vanishes before old age and humiliation. Victoria! has your father no
sins to answer for already, that you will send before his God with your
blood too upon his head?’

Still the girl sat weeping on the ground; while Raphael, utterly at his
wits end, tried hard to persuade himself that it was no concern of his.

‘I am at the service of either or of both, for life or death; only be so
good as to settle it quickly.... Hell! here it is settled for us, with a
vengeance!’

And as he spoke, the tramp and jingle of horsemen rang along the lane,
approaching rapidly.

In an instant Victoria had sprung to her feet--weakness and pain had
vanished.

‘There is one chance--one chance for him! Lift over the bank, sir! Lift
over, while I run forward and meet them. My death will delay them long
enough for you to save him!’

‘Death?’ cried Raphael, seizing her by the arm. ‘If that were all--’

‘God will protect His own,’ answered she calmly, laying her finger
on her lips; and then breaking from his grasp in the strength of her
heroism, vanished into the night.

Her father tried to follow her, but fell on his face, groaning. Raphael
lifted him, strove to drag up the steep bank: but his knees knocked
together; a faint sweat seemed to melt every limb.... There was a pause,
which secured ages long.... Nearer and nearer came the trampling.... A
sudden gleam of the moon revealed Victoria standing with outspread arms,
right before the horses’ heads. A heavenly glory seemed to bathe her
from head to foot.... or was it tears sparkling in his own eyes?....
Then the grate and jar of the horse-hoofs on the road, as they pulled up
suddenly.... He turned his face away and shut his eyes....

‘What are you?’ thundered a voice.

‘Victoria, the daughter of Majoricus the Prefect.’

The voice was low, but yet so clear and calm, that every syllable rang
through Aben-Ezra’s tingling ears....

A shout--a shriek--the confused murmur of many voices.... He looked up,
in spite of himself-a horseman had sprung to the ground, and clasped
Victoria in his arms. The human heart of flesh, asleep for many a year,
leaped into mad life within his breast, and drawing his dagger, he
rushed into the throng--

‘Villains! Hellhounds! I will balk you! She shall die first!’

And the bright blade gleamed over Victoria’s head.... He was struck
down--blinded--half-stunned--but rose again with the energy of
madness.... What was this? Soft arms around him.... Victoria’s!

‘Save him! spare him! He saved us! Sir! It is my brother! We are safe!
Oh, spare the dog! It saved my father!’

‘We have mistaken each other, indeed, sir!’ said a gay young Tribune, in
a voice trembling with joy. ‘Where is my father?’

‘Fifty yards behind. Down, Bran! Quiet! O Solomon, mine ancestor, why
did you not prevent me making such an egregious fool of myself? Why, I
shall be forced, in self-justification, to carry through the farce!’

There is no use telling what followed during the next five minutes,
at the end of which time Raphael found himself astride of a goodly
war-horse, by the side of the young Tribune, who carried Victoria before
him. Two soldiers in the meantime were supporting the Prefect on his
mule, and convincing that stubborn bearer of burdens that it was not
quite so unable to trot as it had fancied, by the combined arguments of
a drench of wine and two sword-points, while they heaped their general
with blessings, and kissed his hands and feet.

‘Your father’s soldiers seem to consider themselves in debt to him: not,
surely, for taking them where they could best run away?’

‘Ah, poor fellows!’ said the Tribune; ‘we have had as real a panic among
us as I ever read of in Arrian or Polybius. But he has been a father
rather than a general to them. It is not often that, out of a routed
army, twenty gallant men will volunteer to ride back into the enemy’s
ranks, on the chance of an old man’s breathing still.’

‘Then you knew where to find us?’ said Victoria.

‘Some of them knew. And he himself showed us this very by-road
yesterday, when we took up our ground, and told us it might be of
service on occasion--and so it has been.’

‘But they told me that you were taken prisoner. Oh, the torture I have
suffered for you!’

‘Silly child! Did you fancy my father’s son would be taken alive? I and
the first troop got away over the garden walls, and cut our way out into
the plain, three hours ago.’

‘Did I not tell you,’ said Victoria, leaning toward Raphael, ‘that God
would protect His own?’

‘You did,’ answered he; and fell into a long and silent meditation.



CHAPTER XIV: THE ROCKS OF THE SIRENS


THESE four months had been busy and eventful enough to Hypatia and
to Philammon; yet the events and the business were of so gradual and
uniform a tenor, that it is as well to pass quickly over them, and show
what had happened principally by its effects.

The robust and fiery desert-lad was now metamorphosed into the pale and
thoughtful student, oppressed with the weight of careful thought and
weary memory. But those remembrances were all recent ones. With his
entrance into Hypatia’s lecture-room, and into the fairy realms of Greek
thought, a new life had begun for him; and the Laura, and Pambo, and
Arsenius, seemed dim phantoms from some antenatal existence, which faded
day by day before the inrush of new and startling knowledge.

But though the friends and scenes of his childhood had fallen back
so swiftly into the far horizon, he was not lonely. His heart found a
lovelier, if not a healthier home, than it had ever known before. For
during those four peaceful and busy months of study there had sprung
up between Hypatia and the beautiful boy one of those pure and yet
passionate friendships--call them rather, with St. Augustine, by the
sacred name of love--which, fair and holy as they are when they link
youth to youth, or girl to girl, reach their full perfection only
between man and woman. The unselfish adoration with which a maiden
may bow down before some strong and holy priest, or with which an
enthusiastic boy may cling to the wise and tender matron, who, amid
the turmoil of the world, and the pride of beauty, and the cares of
wifehood, bends down to with counsel and encouragement--earth knows
no fairer bonds than these, save wedded love itself. And that second
relation, motherly rather than sisterly, had bound Philammon with a
golden chain to the wondrous maid of Alexandria.

From the commencement of his attendance in her lecture-room she had
suited her discourses to what she fancied were his especial spiritual
needs; and many a glance of the eye towards him, on any peculiarly
important sentence, set the poor boy’s heart beating at that sign that
the words were meant for him. But before a month was past, won by the
intense attention with which he watched for every utterance of hers, she
had persuaded her father to give a place in the library as one of his
pupils, among the youths who were employed there daily in transcribing,
as well as in studying, the authors then in fashion.

She saw him at first but seldom--more seldom than she would have wished;
but she dreaded the tongue of scandal, heathen as well as Christian,
and contented herself with inquiring daily from her father about the
progress of the boy. And when at times she entered for a moment the
library, where he sat writing, or passed him on her way to the Museum, a
look was interchanged, on her part of most gracious approval, and on his
of adoring gratitude, which was enough for both. Her spell was working
surely; and she was too confident in her own cause and her own powers to
wish to hurry that transformation for which she so fondly hoped.

‘He must begin at the beginning,’ thought she to herself. ‘Mathematics
and the Parmenides are enough for him as yet. Without a training in the
liberal sciences be cannot gain a faith worthy of those gods to whom
some day I shall present him; and I should find his Christian ignorance
and fanaticism transferred, whole and rude, to the service of those gods
whose shrine is unapproachable save to the spiritual man, who has passed
through the successive vestibules of science and philosophy.’

But soon, attracted herself, as much as wishing to attract him, she
employed him in copying manuscripts for her own use. She sent back his
themes and declamations, corrected with her own hand; and Philammon laid
them by in his little garret at Eudaimon’s house as precious badges of
honour, after exhibiting them to the reverential and envious gaze of the
little porter. So he toiled on, early and late, counting himself
well paid for a week’s intense exertion by a single smile or word of
approbation, and went home to pour out his soul to his host on the
one inexhaustible theme which they had in common--Hypatia and her
perfections. He would have raved often enough on the same subject to
his fellow-pupils, but he shrank not only from their artificial city
manners, but also from their morality, for suspecting which he saw but
too good cause. He longed to go out into the streets, to proclaim to the
whole world the treasure which he had found, and call on all to come and
share it with him. For there was no jealousy in that pure love of his.
Could he have seen her lavishing on thousands far greater favours than
she had conferred on him, he would have rejoiced in the thought that
there were so many more blest beings upon earth, and have loved them
all and every one as brothers, for having deserved her notice. Her
very beauty, when his first flush of wonder was past, he ceased to
mention--ceased even to think of it. Of course she must be beautiful. It
was her right; the natural complement of her other graces but it was to
him only what the mother’s smile is to the infant, the sunlight to the
skylark, the mountain-breeze to the hunter--an inspiring element, on
which he fed unconsciously. Only when he doubted for a moment some
especially startling or fanciful assertion, did he become really aware
of the great loveliness of her who made it; and then his heart silenced
his judgment with the thought--Could any but true words come out of
those perfect lips?--any but royal thoughts take shape within that
queenly head?.... Poor fool! Yet was it not natural enough?

Then, gradually, as she passed the boy, poring over his book, in some
alcove of the Museum Gardens, she would invite him by a glance to join
the knot of loungers and questioners who dangled about her and her
father, and fancied themselves to be reproducing the days of the
Athenian sages amid the groves of another Academus. Sometimes, even, she
had beckoned him to her side as she sat in some retired arbour, attended
only by her father; and there some passing observation, earnest and
personal, however lofty and measured, made him aware, as it was intended
to do, that she had a deeper interest in him, a livelier sympathy for
him, than for the many; that he was in her eyes not merely a pupil to be
instructed, but a soul whom she desired to educate. And those delicious
gleams of sunlight grew more frequent and more protracted; for by each
she satisfied herself more and more that she had not mistaken either
his powers or his susceptibilities: and in each, whether in public or
private, Philammon seemed to bear himself more worthily. For over and
above the natural ease and dignity which accompanies physical beauty,
and the modesty, self-restraint, and deep earnestness which he had
acquired under the discipline of the Laura, his Greek character was
developing itself in all its quickness, subtlety, and versatility, until
he seemed to Hypatia some young Titan, by the side of the flippant,
hasty, and insincere talkers who made up her chosen circle.

But man can no more live upon Platonic love than on the more prolific
species of that common ailment; and for the first month Philammon would
have gone hungry to his couch full many a night, to lie awake from baser
causes than philosophic meditation, had it not been for his magnanimous
host, who never lost heart for a moment, either about himself, or any
other human being. As for Philammon’s going out with him to earn his
bread, he would not hear of it. Did he suppose that he could meet any
of those monkish rascals in the street, without being knocked down and
carried off by main force? And besides there was a sort of impiety in
allowing so hopeful a student to neglect the ‘Divine Ineffable’ in order
to supply the base necessities of the teeth. So he should pay no rent
for his lodgings--positively none; and as for eatables--why, he must
himself work a little harder in order to cater for both. Had not all his
neighbours their litters of children to provide for, while he, thanks
to the immortals, had been far too wise to burden the earth with animals
who would add to the ugliness of their father the Tartarean hue of their
mother? And after all, Philammon could pay him back when he became a
great sophist, and made money, as of course he would some day or other;
and in the meantime, something might turn up--things were always
turning up for those whom the gods favoured; and besides, he had fully
ascertained that on the day on which he first met Philammon, the planets
were favourable, the Mercury being in something or other, he forgot
what, with Helios, which portended for Philammon, in his opinion, a
similar career with that of the glorious and devout Emperor Julian.

Philammon winced somewhat at the hint; which seemed to have an ugly
verisimilitude in it: but still, philosophy he must learn, and bread he
must eat; so he submitted.

But one evening, a few days after he had been admitted as Theon’s pupil,
he found, much to his astonishment, lying on the table in his garret, an
undeniable glittering gold piece. He took it down to the porter the
next morning, and begged him to discover the owner of the lost coin,
and return it duly. But what was his surprise, when the little man, amid
endless capers and gesticulations, informed him with an air of mystery,
that it was anything but lost; that his arrears of rent had been paid
for him; and that by the bounty of the upper powers, a fresh piece of
coin would be forthcoming every month! In vain Philammon demanded to
know who was his benefactor. Eudaimon resolutely kept the secret and
imprecated a whole Tartarus of unnecessary curses on his wife if she
allowed her female garrulity--though the poor creature seemed never to
open her lips from morning till night--to betray so great a mystery.

Who was the unknown friend? There was but one person who could have done
it.... And yet he dared not--the thought was too delightful--think it
was she. It must have been her father. The old man had asked him more
than once about the state of his purse. True, he had always returned
evasive answers; but the kind old man must have divined the truth. Ought
he not--must he not--go and thank him? No; perhaps it was more courteous
to say nothing. If he--she--for of course she had permitted, perhaps
advised, the gift--had intended him to thank them, would they have so
carefully concealed their own generosity?.... Be it so, then. But how
would he not repay them for it! How delightful to be in her debt for
anything--for everything! Would that he could have the enjoyment of
owing her existence itself!

So he took the coin, bought unto himself a cloak of the most philosophic
fashion, and went his way, such as it was, rejoicing.

But his faith in Christianity? What had become of that?

What usually happens in such cases. It was not dead; but nevertheless it
had fallen fast asleep for the time being. He did not disbelieve it;
he would have been shocked to hear such a thing asserted of him: but he
happened to be busy believing something else--geometry, conic sections,
cosmogonies, psychologies, and what not. And so it befell that he had
not just then time to believe in Christianity. He recollected at times
its existence; but even then he neither affirmed nor denied it. When
he had solved the great questions--those which Hypatia set forth as the
roots of all knowledge--how the world was made, and what was the
origin of evil, and what his own personality was, and--that being
settled--whether he had one, with a few other preliminary matters, then
it would be time to return, with his enlarged light, to the study of
Christianity; and if, of course, Christianity should be found to be at
variance with that enlarged light, as Hypatia seemed to think ....
Why, then--What then?.... He would not think about such disagreeable
possibilities. Sufficient for the day was the evil thereof.

Possibilities? It was impossible.... Philosophy could not mislead. Had
not Hypatia defined it, as man’s search after the unseen? And if he
found the unseen by it, did it not come to just the same thing as if the
unseen had revealed itself to him? And he must find it--for logic and
mathematics could not err. If every step was correct, the conclusion
must be correct also; so he must end, after all, in the right path--that
is, of course, supposing Christianity to be the right path--and return
to fight the Church’s battles, with the sword which he had wrested from
Goliath the Philistine....But he had not won the sword yet.; and in the
meanwhile, learning was weary work; and sufficient for the day was the
good, as well as the evil, thereof.

So, enabled by his gold coin each month to devote himself entirely
to study, he became very much what Peter would have coarsely termed a
heathen. At first, indeed, he slipped into the Christian churches,
from a habit of conscience. But habits soon grow sleepy; the fear of
discovery and recapture made his attendance more and more of a labour.
And keeping himself apart as much as possible from the congregation, as
a lonely and secret worshipper, he soon found himself as separate from
them in heart as in daily life. He felt that they, and even more than
they, those flowery and bombastic pulpit rhetoricians, who were paid for
their sermons by the clapping and cheering of the congregation, were
not thinking of, longing after, the same things as himself. Besides, he
never spoke to a Christian; for the negress at his lodgings seemed to
avoid him--whether from modesty or terror, he could not tell; and cut
off thus from the outward ‘communion of saints,’ he found himself fast
parting away from the inward one. So he went no more to church, and
looked the other way, he hardly knew why, whenever he passed the
Caesareum; and Cyril, and all his mighty organisation, became to him
another world, with which he had even less to do than with those
planets over his head, whose mysterious movements, and symbolisms, and
influences Hypatia’s lectures on astronomy were just opening before his
bewildered imagination.

Hypatia watched all this with growing self-satisfaction, and fed herself
with the dream that through Philammon she might see her wildest hopes
realised. After the manner of women, she crowned him, in her own
imagination, with all powers and excellences which she would have wished
him to possess, as well as with those which he actually manifested, till
Philammon would have been as much astonished as self-glorified could he
have seen the idealised caricature of himself which the sweet enthusiast
had painted for her private enjoyment. They were blissful months those
to poor Hypatia. Orestes, for some reason or other, had neglected to
urge his suit, and the Iphigenia-sacrifice had retired mercifully into
the background. Perhaps she should be able now to accomplish all without
it. And yet--it was so long to wait! Years might pass before Philammon’s
education was matured, and with them golden opportunities which might
never recur again.

‘Ah!’ she sighed at times, ‘that Julian had lived a generation later!
That I could have brought all my hard-earned treasures to the feet of
the Poet of the Sun, and cried, “Take me!--Hero, warrior, statesman,
sage, priest of the God of Light! Take thy slave! Command her--send
her--to martyrdom, if thou wilt!” A pretty price would that have been
wherewith to buy the honour of being the meanest of thy apostles, the
fellow-labourer of Iamblichus, Maximus, Libanius, and the choir of sages
who upheld the throne of the last true Caesar!’



CHAPTER XV: NEPHELOCOCCUGIA


Hypatia had always avoided carefully discussing with Philammon any
of those points on which she differed from his former faith. She was
content to let the divine light of philosophy penetrate by its own
power, and educe its own conclusions. But one day, at the very time at
which this history reopens, she was tempted to speak more openly to her
pupil than she yet had done. Her father had introduced him, a few days
before, to a new work of hers on Mathematics; and the delighted and
adoring look with which the boy welcomed her, as he met her in the
Museum Gardens, pardonably tempted her curiosity to inquire what
miracles her own wisdom might have already worked. She stopped in her
walk, and motioned her father to begin a conversation with Philammon.

‘Well!’ asked the old man, with an encouraging smile, ‘and how does our
pupil like his new--’

‘You mean my conic sections, father? It is hardly fair to expect an
unbiased answer in my presence.’

‘Why so?’ said Philammon. ‘Why should I not tell you, as well as all the
world, the fresh and wonderful field of thought which they have opened
to me in a few short hours?’

‘What then?’ asked Hypatia, smiling, as if she knew what the answer
would be. ‘In what does my commentary differ from the original text of
Apollonius, on which I have so faithfully based it?’

‘Oh, as much as a living body differs from a dead one. Instead of mere
dry disquisitions on the properties of lines and curves, I found a
mine of poetry and theology. Every dull mathematical formula seemed
transfigured, as if by a miracle, into the symbol of some deep and noble
principle of the unseen world.’

‘And do you think that he of Perga did not see as much? or that we can
pretend to surpass, in depth of insight, the sages of the elder world?
Be sure that they, like the poets, meant only spiritual things, even
when they seem to talk only of physical ones, and concealed heaven under
an earthly garb, only to hide it from the eyes of the profane; while we,
in these degenerate days, must interpret and display each detail to the
dull ears of men.’

‘Do you think, my young friend,’ asked Theon, ‘that mathematics can
be valuable to the philosopher otherwise than as vehicles of spiritual
truth? Are we to study numbers merely that we may be able to keep
accounts; or as Pythagoras did, in order to deduce from their laws the
ideas by which the universe, man, Divinity itself, consists?’

‘That seems to me certainly to be the nobler purpose.’

‘Or conic sections, that we may know better how to construct machinery;
or rather to devise from them symbols of the relations of Deity to its
various emanations?’

‘You use your dialectic like Socrates himself, my father,’ said Hypatia.

‘If I do, it is only for a temporary purpose. I should be sorry to
accustom Philammon to suppose that the essence of philosophy was to be
found in those minute investigations of words and analyses of notions,
which seem to constitute Plato’s chief power in the eyes of those who,
like the Christian sophist Augustine, worship his letter while they
neglect his spirit; not seeing that those dialogues, which they fancy
the shrine itself, are but vestibules--’

‘Say rather, veils, father.’

‘Veils, indeed, which were intended to baffle the rude gaze of the
carnal-minded; but still vestibules, through which the enlightened soul
might be led up to the inner sanctuary, to the Hesperid gardens and
golden fruit of the Timaeus and the oracles.... And for myself, were
but those two books left, I care not whether every other writing in the
world perished to-morrow.’[Footnote: This astounding speech is usually
attributed to Proclus, Hypatia’s ‘great’ successor.]

‘You must except Homer, father.’

‘Yes, for the herd.... But of what use would he be to them without some
spiritual commentary?’

‘He would tell them as little, perhaps, as the circle tells to the
carpenter who draws one with his compasses.’

‘And what is the meaning of the circle?’ asked Philammon.

‘It may have infinite meanings, like every other natural phenomenon;
and deeper meanings in proportion to the exaltation of the soul which
beholds it. But, consider, is it not, as the one perfect figure, the
very symbol of the totality of the spiritual world; which, like it, is
invisible, except at its circumference, where it is limited by the dead
gross phenomena of sensuous matter! and even as the circle takes its
origin from one centre, itself unseen,--a point, as Euclid defines it,
whereof neither parts nor magnitude can be predicated,--does not
the world of spirits revolve round one abysmal being, unseen and
undefinable--in itself, as I have so often preached, nothing, for it
is conceivable only by the negation of all properties, even of those of
reason, virtue, force; and yet, like the centre of the circle, the cause
of all other existences?’

‘I see,’ said Philammon; for the moment, certainly, the said abysmal
Deity struck him as a somewhat chill and barren notion.... but that
might be caused only by the dulness of his own spiritual perceptions. At
all events, if it was a logical conclusion, it must be right.

‘Let that be enough for the present. Hereafter you may be--I fancy that
I know you well enough to prophesy that you will be--able to recognise
in the equilateral triangle inscribed within the circle, and touching it
only with its angles, the three supra-sensual principles of existence,
which are contained in Deity as it manifests itself in the physical
universe, coinciding with its utmost limits, and yet, like it, dependent
on that unseen central One which none dare name.’

‘Ah!’ said poor Philammon, blushing scarlet at the sense of his own
dulness, ‘I am, indeed, not worthy to have such wisdom wasted upon
my imperfect apprehension.... But, if I may dare to ask.... does not
Apollonius regard the circle, like all other curves, as not depending
primarily on its own centre for its existence, but as generated by the
section of any cone by a plane at right angles to its axis?’

‘But must we not draw, or at least conceive a circle, in order to
produce that cone? And is not the axis of that cone determined by the
centre of that circle?’

Philammon stood rebuked.

‘Do not be ashamed; you have only, unwittingly, laid open another, and
perhaps, as deep a symbol. Can you guess what it is?’

Philammon puzzled in vain.

‘Does it not show you this? That, as every conceivable right section of
the cone discloses the circle, so in all which is fair and symmetric
you will discover Deity, if you but analyse it in a right and symmetric
direction?’

‘Beautiful!’ said Philammon, while the old man added--

‘And does it not show us, too, how the one perfect and original
philosophy may be discovered in all great writers, if we have but that
scientific knowledge which will enable us to extract it?’

‘True, my father: but just now, I wish Philammon, by such thoughts as I
have suggested, to rise to that higher and more spiritual insight into
nature, which reveals her to us as instinct throughout--all fair and
noble forms of her at least--with Deity itself; to make him feel that it
is not enough to say, with the Christians, that God has made the world,
if we make that very assertion an excuse for believing that His presence
has been ever since withdrawn from it.’

‘Christians, I think, would hardly say that,’ said Philammon.

‘Not in words. But, in fact, they regard Deity as the maker of a
dead machine, which, once made, will move of itself thenceforth, and
repudiate as heretics every philosophic thinker, whether Gnostic
or Platonist, who, unsatisfied with so dead, barren, and sordid
a conception of the glorious all, wishes to honour the Deity by
acknowledging His universal presence, and to believe, honestly, the
assertion of their own Scriptures, that He lives and moves, and has His
being in the universe.’

Philammon gently suggested that the passage in question was worded
somewhat differently in the Scripture.

‘True. But if the one be true, its converse will be true also. If
the universe lives and moves, and has its being in Him, must He not
necessarily pervade all things?’

‘Why?--Forgive my dulness, and explain.’

‘Because, if He did not pervade all things, those things which He did
not pervade would be as it were interstices in His being, and in so far,
without Him.’

‘True, but still they would be within His circumference.’

‘Well argued. But yet they would not live in Him, but in themselves.
To live in Him they must be pervaded by His life. Do you think it
possible--do you think it even reverent to affirm that there can be
anything within the infinite glory of Deity which has the power of
excluding from the space which it occupies that very being from which it
draws its worth, and which must have originally pervaded that thing,
in order to bestow on it its organisation and its life? Does He retire
after creating, from the spaces which He occupied during creation,
reduced to the base necessity of making room for His own universe, and
endure the suffering--for the analogy of all material nature tells us
that it is suffering--of a foreign body, like a thorn within the flesh,
subsisting within His own substance? Rather believe that His wisdom and
splendour, like a subtle and piercing fire, insinuates itself eternally
with resistless force through every organised atom, and that were it
withdrawn but for an instant from the petal of the meanest flower, gross
matter, and the dead chaos from which it was formed, would be all which
would remain of its loveliness....

‘Yes’--she went on, after the method of her school, who preferred,
like most decaying ones, harangues to dialectic, and synthesis to
induction.... ‘Look at yon lotus-flower, rising like Aphrodite from
the wave in which it has slept throughout the night, and saluting, with
bending swan-neck, that sun which it will follow lovingly around the
sky. Is there no more there than brute matter, pipes and fibres, colour
and shape, and the meaningless life-in-death which men call vegetation?
Those old Egyptian priests knew better, who could see in the number and
the form of those ivory petals and golden stamina, in that mysterious
daily birth out of the wave, in that nightly baptism, from which it
rises each morning re-born to a new life, the signs of some divine idea,
some mysterious law, common to the flower itself, to the white-robed
priestess who held it in the temple rites, and to the goddess to whom
they both were consecrated.... The flower of Isis!.... Ah!--well. Nature
has her sad symbols, as well as her fair ones. And in proportion as
a misguided nation has forgotten the worship of her to whom they owed
their greatness, for novel and barbaric superstitions, so has her sacred
flower grown rarer and more rare, till now--fit emblem of the worship
over which it used to shed its perfume--it is only to be found in
gardens such as these--a curiosity to the vulgar, and, to such as me, a
lingering monument of wisdom and of glory past away.’

Philammon, it may be seen, was far advanced by this time; for he bore
the allusions to Isis without the slightest shudder. Nay--he dared even
to offer consolation to the beautiful mourner.

‘The philosopher,’ he said, ‘will hardly lament the loss of a mere
outward idolatry. For if, as you seem to think, there were a root of
spiritual truth in the symbolism of nature, that cannot die. And thus
the lotus-flower must still retain its meaning, as long as its species
exists on earth.’

‘Idolatry!’ answered she, with a smile. ‘My pupil must not repeat to me
that worn-out Christian calumny. Into whatsoever low superstitions the
pious vulgar may have fallen, it is the Christians now, and not the
heathens, who are idolaters. They who ascribe miraculous power to dead
men’s bones, who make temples of charnel-houses, and bow before the
images of the meanest of mankind, have surely no right to accuse of
idolatry the Greek or the Egyptian, who embodies in a form of symbolic
beauty ideas beyond the reach of words!

‘Idolatry? Do I worship the Pharos when I gaze at it, as I do for hours,
with loving awe, as the token to me of the all-conquering might of
Hellas? Do I worship the roll on which Homer’s words are written, when
I welcome with delight the celestial truths which it unfolds to me, and
even prize and love the material book for the sake of the message
which it brings? Do you fancy that any but the vulgar worship the image
itself, or dream that it can help or hear them? Does the lover mistake
his mistress’s picture for the living, speaking reality? We worship the
idea of which the image is a symbol. Will you blame us because we use
that symbol to represent the idea to our own affections and emotions
instead of leaving it a barren notion, a vague imagination of our own
intellect?’

‘Then,’ asked Philammon, with a faltering voice, yet unable to restrain
his curiosity, ‘then you do reverence the heathen gods?’

Why Hypatia should have felt this question a sore one, puzzled
Philammon; but she evidently did feel it as such, for she answered
haughtily enough--

‘If Cyril had asked me that question, I should have disdained to answer.
To you I will tell, that before I can answer your question you must
learn what those whom you call heathen gods are. The vulgar, or rather
those who find it their interest to calumniate the vulgar for the sake
of confounding philosophers with them, may fancy them mere human beings,
subject like man to the sufferings of pain and love, to the limitations
of personality. We, on the other hand, have been taught by the primeval
philosophers of Greece, by the priests of ancient Egypt, and the sages
of Babylon, to recognise in them the universal powers of nature, those
children of the all-quickening spirit, which are but various emanations
of the one primeval unity--say rather, various phases of that unity, as
it has been variously conceived, according to the differences of climate
and race, by the wise of different nations. And thus, in our eyes, he
who reverences the many, worships by that very act, with the highest
and fullest adoration, the one of whose perfection they are the partial
antitypes; perfect each in themselves, but each the image of only one of
its perfections.’

‘Why, then,’ said Philammon, much relieved by this explanation, ‘do you
so dislike Christianity? may it not be one of the many methods--’

‘Because,’ she answered, interrupting him impatiently, ‘because it
denies itself to be one of those many methods, and stakes its existence
on the denial; because it arrogates to itself the exclusive revelation
of the Divine, and cannot see, in its self-conceit, that its own
doctrines disprove that assumption by their similarity to those of all
creeds. There is not a dogma of the Galileans which may not be found,
under some form or other, in some of those very religions from which it
pretends to disdain borrowing.’

‘Except,’ said Theon, ‘its exaltation of all which is human and
low-born, illiterate, and levelling.’

‘Except that--. But look! here comes some one whom I cannot--do not
choose to meet. Turn this way--quick!’

And Hypatia, turning pale as death, drew her father with unphilosophic
haste down a side-walk.

‘Yes,’ she went on to herself, as soon as she had recovered her
equanimity. ‘Were this Galilean superstition content to take its place
humbly among the other “religiones licitas” of the empire, one might
tolerate it well enough, as an anthropomorphic adumbration of divine
things fitted for the base and toiling herd; perhaps peculiarly fitted,
because peculiarly flattering to them. But now--’

‘There is Miriam again,’ said Philammon, ‘right before us!’

‘Miriam?’ asked Hypatia severely. ‘You know her then? How is that?’

‘She lodges at Eudaimon’s house, as I do,’ answered Philammon frankly.
‘Not that I ever interchanged, or wish to interchange, a word with so
base a creature.’

‘Do not! I charge you!’ said Hypatia, almost imploringly. But there was
now no way of avoiding her, and perforce Hypatia and her tormentress met
face to face.

‘One word! one moment, beautiful lady,’ began the old woman, with a
slavish obeisance. ‘Nay, do not push by so cruelly. I have--see what I
have for you!’ and she held out with a mysterious air, ‘The Rainbow of
Solomon.’

‘Ah! I knew you would stop a moment--not for the ring’s sake, of course,
nor even for the sake of one who once offered it to you.--Ah! and where
is he now? Dead of love, perhaps! at least, here is his last token to
the fairest one, the cruel one.... Well, perhaps she is right.... To be
an empress--an empress!.... Far finer than anything the poor Jew could
have offered.... But still.... An empress need not be above hearing her
subject’s petition....’

All this was uttered rapidly, and in a wheedling undertone, with a
continual snaky writhing of her whole body, except her eye, which
seemed, in the intense fixity of its glare, to act as a fulcrum for all
her limbs; and from that eye, as long as it kept its mysterious hold,
there was no escaping.

‘What do you mean? What have I to do with this ring?’ asked Hypatia,
half frightened.

‘He who owned it once, offers it to you now. You recollect a little
black agate--a paltry thing..... If you have not thrown it away, as you
most likely have, he wishes to redeem it with this opal.... a gem surely
more fit for such a hand as that.’

‘He gave me the agate, and I shall keep it.’

‘But this opal--worth, oh, worth ten thousand gold pieces--in exchange
for that paltry broken thing not worth one?’

‘I am not a dealer, like you, and have not yet learnt to value things
by their money price. It that agate had been worth money, I would never
have accepted it.’

‘Take the ring, take it, my darling,’ whispered Theon impatiently; ‘it
will pay all our debts.’

‘Ah, that it will--pay them all,’ answered the old woman, who seemed to
have mysteriously overheard him.

‘What!--my father! Would you, too, counsel me to be so mercenary? My
good woman,’ she went on, turning to Miriam, ‘I cannot expect you to
understand the reason of my refusal. You and I have a different standard
of worth. But for the sake of the talisman engraven on that agate, if
for no other reason, I cannot give it up.’

‘Ah! for the sake of the talisman! That is wise, now! That is noble!
Like a philosopher! Oh, I will not say a word more. Let the beautiful
prophetess keep the agate, and take the opal too; for see, there is a
charm on it also! The name by which Solomon compelled the demons to do
his bidding. Look! What might you not do now, if you knew how to use
that! To have great glorious angels, with six wings each, bowing at your
feet whensoever you called them, and saying, “Here am I, mistress; send
me.” Only look at it!’

Hypatia took the tempting bait, and examined it with more curiosity than
she would have wished to confess; while the old woman went on--

‘But the wise lady knows how to use the black agate, of course?
Aben-Ezra told her that, did he not?’

Hypatia blushed somewhat; she was ashamed to confess that Aben-Ezra had
not revealed the secret to her, probably not believing that there was
any, and that the talisman had been to her only a curious plaything,
of which she liked to believe one day that it might possibly have
some occult virtue, and the next day to laugh at the notion as
unphilosophical and barbaric; so she answered, rather severely, that her
secrets were her own property.

‘Ah, then! she knows it all--the fortunate lady! And the talisman
has told her whether Heraclian has lost or won Rome by this time, and
whether she is to be the mother of a new dynasty of Ptolemies, or to die
a virgin, which the Four Angels avert! And surely she has had the great
demon come to her already, when she rubbed the flat side, has she not?’

‘Go, foolish woman! I am not like you, the dupe of childish
superstitions.’

‘Childish superstitions! Ha! ha! ha!’ said the old woman, as she turned
to go, with obeisances more lowly than ever. ‘And she has not seen the
Angels yet!.... Ah well! perhaps some day, when she wants to know how to
use the talisman, the beautiful lady will condescend to let the poor old
Jewess show her the way.’

And Miriam disappeared down an alley, and plunged into the thickest
shrubberies, while the three dreamers went on their way.

Little thought Hypatia that the moment the old woman had found herself
alone, she had dashed herself down on the turf, rolling and biting at
the leaves like an infuriated wild beast..... ‘I will have it yet! I
will have it, if I tear out her heart with it!’



CHAPTER XVI: VENUS AND PALLAS


As Hypatia was passing across to her lecture-room that afternoon, she
was stopped midway by a procession of some twenty Goths and damsels,
headed by Pelagia herself, in all her glory of jewels, shawls, and
snow-white mule; while by her side rode the Amal, his long legs, like
those of Gang-Rolf the Norseman, all but touching the ground, as he
crushed down with his weight a delicate little barb, the best substitute
to be found in Alexandria for the huge black chargers of his native
land.

On they came, followed by a wondering and admiring mob, straight to the
door of the Museum, and stopping began to dismount, while their slaves
took charge of the mules and horses.

There was no escape for Hypatia; pride forbade her to follow her own
maidenly instinct, and to recoil among the crowd behind her; and in
another moment the Amal had lifted Pelagia from her mule, and the rival
beauties of Alexandria stood, for the first time in their lives, face to
face.

‘May Athene befriend you this day, Hypatia!’ said Pelagia with her
sweetest smile. ‘I have brought my guards to hear somewhat of your
wisdom this afternoon. I am anxious to know whether you can teach Ahem
anything more worth listening to than the foolish little songs which
Aphrodite taught me, when she raised me from the sea-foam, as she rose
herself, and named me Pelagia.’

Hypatia drew herself up to her stateliest height, and returned no
answer.

‘I think my bodyguard will well hear comparison with yours. At least
they are the princes and descendants of deities. So it is but fitting
that they should enter before your provincials. Will you show them the
way?’

No answer.

‘Then I must do it myself. Come, Amal!’ and she swept up the steps,
followed by the Goths, who put the Alexandrians aside right and left, as
if they had been children.

‘Ah! treacherous wanton that you are!’ cried a young man’s voice out
of the murmuring crowd. ‘After having plundered us of every coin out
of which you could dupe us, here you are squandering our patrimonies on
barbarians!’

‘Give us back our presents, Pelagia,’ cried another, ‘and you are
welcome to your herd of wild bulls!’

‘And I will!’ cried she, stopping suddenly; and clutching at her chains
and bracelets, she was on the point of dashing them among the astonished
crowd--

‘There! take your gifts! Pelagia and her girls scorn to be debtors to
boys, while they are worshipped by men like these!’

But the Amal, who, luckily for the students, had not understood a word
of this conversation, seized her arm, asking if she were mad.

‘No, no!’ panted she, inarticulate with passion. ‘Give me gold--every
coin you have. These wretches are twitting me with what they gave me
before--before--oh Amal, you understand me?’ And she clung imploringly
to his arm.

‘Oh! Heroes! each of you throw his purse among these fellows! they say
that we and our ladies are living on their spoils!’ And he tossed his
purse among the crowd.

In an instant every Goth had followed his example: more than one
following it up by dashing a bracelet or necklace into the face of some
hapless philosophaster.

‘I have no lady, my young friends,’ said old Wulf, in good enough Greek,
‘and owe you nothing: so I shall keep my money, as you might have kept
yours; and as you might, too, old Smid, if you had been as wise as I.’

‘Don’t be stingy, prince, for the honour of the Goths,’ said Smid,
laughing.

‘If I take in gold I pay in iron,’ answered Wulf, drawing half out of
its sheath the huge broad blade, at the ominous brown stains of which
the studentry recoiled; and the whole party swept into the empty
lecture-room, and seated themselves at their ease in the front ranks.

Poor Hypatia! At first she determined not to lecture--then to send for
Orestes--then to call on her students to defend the sanctity of the
Museum; but pride, as well as prudence, advised her better; to retreat
would be to confess herself conquered--to disgrace philosophy--to lose
her hold on the minds of all waverers. No! she would go on and brave
everything, insults, even violence; and with trembling limbs and a pale
cheek, she mounted the tribune and began.

To her surprise and delight, however, her barbarian auditors were
perfectly well behaved. Pelagia, in childish good-humour at her triumph,
and perhaps, too, determined to show her contempt for her adversary by
giving her every chance, enforced silence and attention, and checked
the tittering of the girls, for a full half-hour. But at the end of
that time the heavy breathing of the slumbering Amal, who had been twice
awoke by her, resounded unchecked through the lecture-room, and deepened
into a snore; for Pelagia herself was as fast asleep as he. But now
another censor took upon himself the office of keeping order. Old Wulf,
from the moment Hypatia had begun, had never taken his eyes off her
face; and again and again the maiden’s weak heart had been cheered, as
she saw the smile of sturdy intelligence and honest satisfaction which
twinkled over that scarred and bristly visage; while every now and then
the graybeard wagged approval, until she found herself, long before the
end of the oration, addressing herself straight to her new admirer.

At last it was over, and the students behind, who had sat meekly through
it all, without the slightest wish to ‘upset’ the intruders, who had so
thoroughly upset them, rose hurriedly, glad enough to get safe out of so
dangerous a neighbourhood. But to their astonishment, as well as to that
of Hypatia, old Wulf rose also, and stumbling along to the foot of the
tribune, pulled out his purse, and laid it at Hypatia’s feet.

‘What is this?’ asked she, half terrified at the approach of a figure
more rugged and barbaric than she had ever beheld before.

‘My fee for what I have heard to-day. You are a right noble maiden, and
may Freya send you a husband worthy of you, and make you the mother of
kings!’

And Wulf retired with his party.

Open homage to her rival, before her very face! Pelagia felt quite
inclined to hate old Wulf.

But at least he was the only traitor. The rest of the Goths agreed
unanimously that Hypatia was a very foolish person, who was wasting her
youth and beauty in talking to donkey-riders; and Pelagia remounted her
mule, and the Goths their horses, for a triumphal procession homeward.

And yet her heart was sad, even in her triumph. Right and wrong were
ideas as unknown to her as they were to hundreds of thousands in her
day. As far as her own consciousness was concerned, she was as destitute
of a soul as the mule on which she rode. Gifted by nature with boundless
frolic and good-humour, wit and cunning, her Greek taste for the
physically beautiful and graceful developed by long training, until she
had become, without a rival, the most perfect pantomime, dancer,
and musician who catered for the luxurious tastes of the Alexandrian
theatres, she had lived since her childhood only for enjoyment and
vanity, and wished for nothing more. But her new affection, or rather
worship, for the huge manhood of her Gothic lover had awoke in her a new
object--to keep him--to live for him--to follow him to the ends of the
earth, even if he tired of her, ill-used her, despised her. And slowly,
day by day, Wulf’s sneers bad awakened in her a dread that perhaps the
Amal might despise her.... Why, she could not guess: but what sort of
women were those Alrunas of whom Wulf sang, of whom even the Amal and
his men spoke with reverence, as something nobler, not only than her,
but even than themselves? And what was it which Wulf had recognised in
Hypatia which had bowed the stern and coarse old warrior before her in
that public homage?.... it was not difficult to say what.... But why
should that make Hypatia or any one else attractive? And the poor
little child of nature gazed in deep bewilderment at a crowd of new
questions, as a butterfly might at the pages of the book on which it has
settled, and was sad and discontented--not with herself, for was she
not Pelagia the perfect?--but with these strange fancies which came
into other people’s heads.--Why should not every one be as happy as they
could? And who knew better than she how to be happy, and to make others
happy?....

‘Look at that old monk standing on the pavement, Amalric! Why does he
stare so at me? Tell him to go away.’

The person at whom she pointed, a delicate-featured old man, with a
venerable white beard, seemed to hear her; for he turned with a sudden
start, and then, to Pelagia’s astonishment, put his hands before his
face, and burst convulsively into tears.

‘What does he mean by behaving in that way? Bring him here to me this
moment! I will know!’ cried she, petulantly catching at the new object,
in order to escape from her own thoughts.

In a moment a Goth had led up the weeper, who came without demur to the
side of Pelagia’s mule.

‘Why were you so rude as to burst out crying in my face?’ asked she
petulantly.

The old man looked up sadly and tenderly, and answered in a low voice,
meant only for her ear--

‘And how can I help weeping, when I see anything as beautiful as you are
destined to the flames of hell for ever?’

‘The flames of hell?’ said Pelagia, with a shudder. ‘What for?’

‘Do you not know?’ asked the old man, with a look of sad surprise. ‘Have
you forgotten what you are?’

‘I? I never hurt a fly!’

‘Why do you look so terrified, my darling? What have you been saying to
her, you old villain?’ and the Amal raised his whip.

‘Oh! do not strike him. Come, come to-morrow, and tell me what you
mean.’

‘No, we will have no monks within our doors, frightening silly women.
Off, sirrah! and thank the lady that you have escaped with a whole
skin.’ And the Amal caught the bridle of Pelagia’s mule, and pushed
forward, leaving the old man gazing sadly after them.

But the beautiful sinner was evidently not the object which had brought
the old monk of the desert into a neighbourhood so strange and ungenial
to his habits; for, recovering himself in a few moments, he hurried on
to the door of the Museum, and there planted himself, scanning earnestly
the faces of the passers-out, and meeting, of course, with his due share
of student ribaldry.

‘Well, old cat, and what mouse are you on the watch for, at the hole’s
mouth here?’

‘Just come inside, and see whether the mice will not singe your whiskers
for you....’

‘Here is my mouse, gentlemen,’ answered the old monk, with a bow and
a smile, as he laid his hand on Philammon’s arm, and presented to his
astonished eyes the delicate features and high retreating forehead of
Arsenius.

‘My father,’ cried the boy, in the first impulse of affectionate
recognition; and then--he had expected some such meeting all along, but
now that it was come at last, he turned pale as death. The students saw
his emotion.

‘Hands off, old Heautontimoroumenos! He belongs to our guild now! Monks
have no more business with sons than with wives. Shall we hustle him for
you, Philammon?’

‘Take care how you show off, gentlemen: the Goths are not yet out of
hearing!’ answered Philammon, who was learning fast how to give a smart
answer; and then, fearing the temper of the young dandies, and shrinking
from the notion of any insult to one so reverend and so beloved as
Arsenius, he drew the old man gently away, and walked up the street with
him in silence, dreading what was coming.

‘And are these your friends?’

‘Heaven forbid! I have nothing in common with such animals but flesh and
blood, and a seat in the lecture-room!’

‘Of the heathen woman?’

Philammon, after the fashion of young men in fear, rushed desperately
into the subject himself, just because he dreaded Arsenius’s entering on
it quietly.

‘Yes, of the heathen woman. Of course you have seen Cyril before you
came hither?’

‘I have, and--’

‘And,’ went on Philammon, interrupting him, ‘you have been told every
lie which prurience, stupidity, and revenge can invent. That I have
trampled on the cross--sacrificed to all the deities in the pantheon-and
probably’--(and he blushed scarlet)--‘that that purest and holiest of
beings--who, if she were not what people call a pagan, would be, and
deserves to be, worshipped as the queen of saints--that she--and I--’
and he stopped.

‘Have I said that I believed what I may have heard?’

‘No--and therefore, as they are all simple and sheer falsehoods, there
is no more to be said on the subject. Not that I shall not be delighted
to answer any questions of yours, my dearest father--’

‘Have I asked any, my child?’

‘No. So we may as well change the subject for the present,’--and he
began overwhelming the old man with inquiries about himself, Pambo, and
each and all of the inhabitants of the Laura to which Arsenius, to
the boy’s infinite relief, answered cordially and minutely, and even
vouchsafed a smile at some jest of Philammon’s on the contrast between
the monks of Nitria and those of Scetis.

Arsenius was too wise not to see well enough what all this flippancy
meant; and too wise, also, not to know that Philammon’s version was
probably quite as near the truth as Peter’s and Cyril’s; but for reasons
of his own, merely replied by an affectionate look, and a compliment to
Philammon’s growth.

And yet you seem thin and pale, my boy.’

‘Study,’ said Philammon, ‘study. One cannot burn the midnight oil
without paying some penalty for it.... However, I am richly repaid
already; I shall be more so hereafter.’

‘Let us hope so. But who are those Goths whom I passed in the streets
just now?’

‘Ah! my father,’ said Philammon, glad in his heart of any excuse to
turn the conversation, and yet half uneasy and suspicious at Arsenius’s
evident determination to avoid the very object of his visit. ‘It must
have been you, then, whom I saw stop and speak to Pelagia at the farther
end of the street. What words could you possibly have had wherewith to
honour such a creature?’

‘God knows. Some secret sympathy touched my heart.... Alas! poor child!
But how came you to know her?’

‘All Alexandria knows the shameless abomination,’ interrupted a voice
at their elbow--none other than that of the little porter, who had
been dodging and watching the pair the whole way, and could no longer
restrain his longing to meddle. ‘And well it had been for many a rich
young man had odd Miriam never brought her over, in an evil day, from
Athens hither.’

‘Miriam?’

‘Yes, monk; a name not unknown, I am told, in palaces as well as in
slave-markets.’

‘An evil-eyed old Jewess?’

‘A Jewess she is, as her name might have informed you; and as for her
eyes, I consider them, or used to do so, of course--for her injured
nation have been long expelled from Alexandria by your fanatic tribe--as
altogether divine and demoniac, let the base imagination of monks call
them what it likes.’

‘But how did you know this Pelagia, my son? She is no fit company for
such as you.’

Philammon told, honestly enough, the story of his Nile journey, and
Pelagia’s invitation to him.

‘You did not surely accept it?’

‘Heaven forbid that Hypatia’s scholar should so degrade himself!’

Arsenius shook his head sadly.

‘You would not have had me go?’

‘No, boy. But how long hast thou learned to call thyself Hypatia’s
scholar, or to call it a degradation to visit the most sinful, if
thou mightest thereby bring back a lost lamb to the Good Shepherd?
Nevertheless, thou art too young for such employment--and she meant to
tempt thee doubtless.’

‘I do not think it. She seemed struck by my talking Athenian Greek, and
having come from Athens.’

‘And how long since she came from Athens?’ said Arsenius, after a pause.
‘Who knows?’

‘Just after it was sacked by the barbarians,’ said the little porter,
who, beginning to suspect a mystery, was peaking and peering like
an excited parrot. ‘The old dame brought her hither among a cargo of
captive boys and girls.’

‘The time agrees.... Can this Miriam be found?’

‘A sapient and courteous question for a monk to ask! Do you not know
that Cyril has expelled all Jews four months ago?’

‘True, true.... Alas!’ said the old man to himself, ‘how little
the rulers of this world guess their own power! They move a finger
carelessly, and forget that that finger may crush to death hundreds
whose names they never heard--and every soul of them as precious in
God’s sight as Cyril’s own.’

‘What is the matter, my father?’ asked Philammon. ‘You seem deeply moved
about this woman....’

‘And she is Miriam’s slave?’

‘Her freedwoman this four years past,’ said the porter. ‘The good
lady--for reasons doubtless excellent in themselves, though not
altogether patent to the philosophic mind--thought good to turn her
loose on the Alexandrian republic, to seek what she might devour.’

‘God help her! And you are certain that Miriam is not in Alexandria?’

The little porter turned very red, and Philammon did so likewise; but he
remembered his promise, and kept it.

‘You both know something of her, I can see. You cannot deceive an
old statesman, sir!’--turning to the little porter with a look of
authority--‘poor monk though he be now. If you think fitting to tell me
what you know, I promise you that neither she nor you shall be losers by
your confidence in me. If not, I shall find means to discover.’

Both stood silent.

‘Philammon, my son! and art thou too in league against--no, not against
me; against thyself, poor misguided boy?’

‘Against myself?’

‘Yes--I have said it. But unless you will trust me, I cannot trust you.’

‘I have promised.’

‘And I, sir statesman, or monk, or both, or neither, have sworn by the
immortal gods!’ said the porter, looking very big.

Arsenius paused.

‘There are those who hold that an oath by an idol, being nothing, is of
itself void. I do not agree with them. If thou thinkest it sin to break
thine oath, to thee it is sin. And for thee, my poor child, thy promise
is sacred, were it made to Iscariot himself. But hear me. Can either of
you, by asking this woman, be so far absolved as to give me speech of
her? Tell her--that is, if she be in Alexandria, which God grant--all
that has passed between us here, and tell her, on the solemn oath of a
Christian, that Arsenius, whose name she knows well, will neither injure
nor betray her. Will you do this?’

‘Arsenius?’ said the little porter, with a look of mingled awe and pity.

The old man smiled. ‘Arsenius, who was once called the Father of the
Emperors. Even she will trust that name.’

‘I will go this moment’ sir; I will fly!’ and off rushed the little
porter.

‘The little fellow forgets,’ said Arsenius, with a smile, ‘to how much
he has confessed already, and how easy it were now to trace him to the
old hag’s lair.... Philammon, my son.... I have many tears to weep over
thee--but they must wait a while, I have thee safe now,’ and the old man
clutched his arm. ‘Thou wilt not leave thy poor old father? Thou wilt
not desert me for the heathen woman?’

‘I will stay with you, I promise you, indeed! if--if you will not say
unjust things of her.’

‘I will speak evil of no one, accuse no one, but myself. I will not say
one harsh word to thee, my poor boy. But listen now! Thou knowest that
thou camest from Athens. Knowest thou that it was I who brought thee
hither?’

‘You?’

‘I, my son: but when I brought thee to the Laura, it seemed right that
thou, as the son of a noble gentleman, shouldest hear nothing of it.
But tell me: dost thou recollect father or mother, brother or sister; or
anything of thy home in Athens?’

‘No.’

‘Thanks be to God. But, Philammon, if thou hadst had a sister-hush! And
if--I only say if--,

‘A sister!’ interrupted Philammon. ‘Pelagia?’

‘God forbid, my son! But a sister thou hadst once--some three years
older than thee she seemed.’

‘What! did you know her?’

‘I saw her but once--on one sad day.--Poor children both! I will not
sadden you by telling you where and how.’

‘And why did you not bring her hither with me? You surely had not the
heart to part us?’

‘Ah, my son, what right had an old monk with a fair young girl? And,
indeed, even had I had the courage, it would have been impossible. There
were others, richer than I, to whose covetousness her youth and beauty
seemed a precious prize. When I saw her last, she was in company with an
ancient Jewess. Heaven grant that this Miriam may prove to be the one!’

‘And I have a sister!’ gasped Philammon, his eyes bursting with tears.
‘We must find her! You will help me?--Now--this moment! There is nothing
else to be thought of, spoken of, done, henceforth, till she is found!’

‘Ah, my son, my son! Better, better, perhaps, to leave her in the hands
of God! What if she were dead? To discover that, would be to discover
needless sorrow. And what if--God grant that it be not so! she had only
a name to live, and were dead, worse than dead, in sinful pleasure--’

‘We would save her, or die trying to save her! Is it not enough for
me that she is my sister?’ Arsenius shook his head. He little knew the
strange new light and warmth which his words had poured in upon the
young heart beside him. ‘A sister!’ What mysterious virtue was there in
that simple word, which made Philammon’s brain reel and his heart throb
madly? A sister! not merely a friend, an equal, a help-mate, given
by God Himself, for loving whom none, not even a monk, could blame
him.--Not merely something delicate, weak, beautiful--for of course she
must be beautiful-whom he might cherish, guide, support, deliver, die
for, and find death delicious. Yes--all that, and more than that, lay
in the sacred word. For those divided and partial notions had flitted
across his mind too rapidly to stir such passion as moved him now; even
the hint of her sin and danger had been heard heedlessly, if heard at
all. It was the word itself which bore its own message, its own spell
to the heart of the fatherless and motherless foundling, as he faced for
the first time the deep, everlasting, divine reality of kindred.... A
sister! of his own flesh and blood--born of the same father, the
same mother--his, his, for ever! How hollow and fleeting seemed all
‘spiritual sonships,’ ‘spiritual daughterhoods,’ inventions of the
changing fancy, the wayward will of man! Arsenius--Pambo--ay, Hypatia
herself--what were they to him now? Here was a real relationship .... A
sister! What else was worth caring for upon earth?

‘And she was at Athens when Pelagia was’--he cried at last--‘perhaps
knew her--let us go to Pelagia herself!’

‘Heaven forbid!’ said Arsenius. ‘We must wait at least till Miriam’s
answer comes.’

‘I can show you her house at least in the meanwhile; and you can go in
yourself when you will. I do not ask to enter. Come! I feel certain that
my finding her is in some way bound up with Pelagia. Had I not met her
on the Nile, had you not met her in the street, I might never have heard
that I had a sister. And if she went with Miriam, Pelagia must know
her--she may be in that very house at this moment!’

Arsenius had his reasons for suspecting that Philammon was but too
right. But he contented himself with yielding to the boy’s excitement,
and set off with him in the direction of the dancer’s house.

They were within a few yards of the gate, when hurried footsteps behind
them, and voices calling them by name, made them turn; and behold,
evidently to the disgust of Arsenius as much as Philammon himself, Peter
the Reader and a large party of monks!

Philammon’s first impulse was to escape; Arsenius himself caught him by
the arm, and seemed inclined to hurry on.

‘No!’ thought the youth, ‘am I not a free man, and a philosopher?’ and
facing round, he awaited the enemy.

‘Ah, young apostate! So you have found him, reverend and ill-used sir.
Praised be Heaven for this rapid success!’

‘My good friend,’ asked Arsenius, in a trembling voice, ‘what brings you
here?’

‘Heaven forbid that I should have allowed your sanctity and age to
go forth without some guard against the insults and violence of this
wretched youth and his profligate companions. We have been following you
afar off all the morning, with hearts full of filial solicitude.’

‘Many thanks; but indeed your kindness has been superfluous. My son
here, from whom I have met with nothing but affection, and whom, indeed,
I believe far more innocent than report declared him, is about to return
peaceably with me. Are you not, Philammon?’

‘Alas! my father’’ said Philammon, with an effort, ‘how can I find
courage to say it’?--but I cannot return with you.’

‘Cannot return?’

‘I vowed that I would never again cross that threshold till--’

‘And Cyril does. He bade me, indeed he bade me, assure you that he would
receive you back as a son, and forgive and forget all the past.’

‘Forgive and forget? That is my part--not his. Will he right me against
that tyrant and his crew? Will he proclaim me openly to be an innocent
and persecuted man, unjustly beaten and driven forth for obeying his own
commands? Till he does that, I shall not forget that I am a free man.’

‘A free man!’ said Peter, with an unpleasant smile; ‘that remains to
be proved, my gay youth; and will need more evidence than that smart
philosophic cloak and those well-curled locks which you have adopted
since I saw you last.’

‘Remains to be proved?’

Arsenius made an imploring gesture to Peter to be silent.

‘Nay, sir. As I foretold to you, this one way alone remains; the
blame of it, if there be blame, must rest on the unhappy youth whose
perversity renders it necessary.’

‘For God’s sake, spare me!’ cried the old man, dragging Peter aside,
while Philammon stood astonished, divided between indignation and vague
dread.

‘Did I not tell you again and again that I never could bring myself to
call a Christian man my slave? And him, above all, my spiritual son?’

‘And, most reverend sir, whose zeal is only surpassed by your tenderness
and mercy, did not the holy patriarch assure you that your scruples were
groundless? Do you think that either he or I can have less horror than
you have of slavery in itself? Heaven forbid! But when an immortal soul
is at stake--when a lost lamb is to be brought back to the fold--surely
you may employ the authority which the law gives you for the salvation
of that precious charge committed to you? What could be more conclusive
than his Holiness’s argument this morning? “Christians are bound to
obey the laws of this world for conscience’ sake, even though, in the
abstract, they may disapprove of them, and deny their authority. Then,
by parity of reasoning, it must be lawful for them to take the advantage
which those same laws offer them, when by so doing the glory of God may
be advanced.”’

Arsenius still hung back, with eyes brimming with tears; but Philammon
himself put an end to the parley.

‘What is the meaning of all this? Are you, too, in a conspiracy against
me? Speak, Arsenius!’

‘This is the meaning of it, blinded sinner!’ cried Peter. ‘That you are
by law the slave of Arsenius, lawfully bought with his money in the city
of Ravenna; and that he has the power, and, as I trust, for the sake of
your salvation, the will also, to compel you to accompany him.’

Philammon recoiled across the pavement, with eyes flashing defiance. A
slave! The light of heaven grew black to him.... Oh, that Hypatia might
never know his shame! Yet it was impossible. Too dreadful to be true....

‘You lie!’ almost shrieked he. ‘I am the son of a noble citizen of
Athens. Arsenius told me so, but this moment, with his own lips!’

‘Ah, but he bought you--bought you in the public market; and he can
prove it!’

‘Hear me--hear me, my son!’ cried the old man, springing toward him.
Philammon, in his fury, mistook the gesture and thrust him fiercely
back.

‘Your son!--your slave! Do not insult the name of son by applying it to
me. Yes, sir; your slave in body, but not in soul! Ay, seize me--drag
home the fugitive--scourge him--brand him--chain him in the mill, if you
can; but even for that the free heart has a remedy. If you will not let
me live as a philosopher, you shall see me die like one!’

‘Seize the fellow, my brethren!’ cried Peter, while Arsenius, utterly
unable to restrain either party, hid his face and wept.

‘Wretches!’ cried the boy; ‘you shall never take me alive, while I have
teeth or nails left. Treat me as a brute beast, and I will defend myself
as such!’

‘Out of the way there, rascals! Place for the Prefect! What are you
squabbling about here, you unmannerly monks?’ shouted peremptory voices
from behind. The crowd parted, and disclosed the apparitors of Orestes,
who followed in his robes of office.

A sudden hope flashed before Philammon, and in an instant he had burst
through the mob, and was clinging to the Prefect’s chariot.

‘I am a free-born Athenian, whom these monks wish to kidnap back into
slavery! I claim your protection!’

‘And you shall have it, right or wrong, my handsome fellow. By Heaven,
you are much too good-looking to be made a monk of! What do you mean,
you villains, by attempting to kidnap free men? Is it not enough for you
to lock up every mad girl whom you can dupe, but you must--’

‘His master is here present, your Excellency, who will swear to the
purchase.’

‘Or to anything else for the glory of God. Out of the way! And take
care, you tall scoundrel, that I do not get a handle against you. You
have been one of my marked men for many a month. Off!’

‘His master demands the rights of the law as a Roman citizen,’ said
Peter, pushing forward Arsenius.

‘If he be a Roman citizen, let him come and make his claim at the
tribune to-morrow, in legal form. But I would have you remember, ancient
sir, that I shall require you to prove your citizenship before we
proceed to the question of purchase.’

‘The law does not demand that,’ quoth Peter.

‘Knock that fellow down, apparitor!’ Whereat Peter vanished, and an
ominous growl rose from the mob of monks.

‘What am I to do, most noble sir?’ said Philammon.

‘Whatever you like, till the third hour to-morrow--if you are fool
enough to appear at the tribune. If you will take my advice’ you will
knock down these fellows right and left, and run for your life.’ And
Orestes drove on.

Philammon saw that it was his only chance, and did so; and in another
minute he found himself rushing headlong into the archway of Pelagia’s
house, with a dozen monks at his heels. As luck would have it, the outer
gates, at which the Goths had just entered, were still open; but the
inner ones which led into the court beyond were fast. He tried them,
but in vain. There was an open door in the wall on his right: he rushed
through it, into a long range of stables, and into the arms of Wulf and
Smid, who were unsaddling and feeding, like true warriors, their own
horses.

‘Souls of my fathers!’ shouted Smid, ‘here’s our young monk come back!
What brings you here head over heels in this way, young curly-pate?’

‘Save me from those wretches!’ pointing to the monks, who were peeping
into the doorway.

Wulf seemed to understand it all in a moment; for, snatching up a heavy
whip, he rushed at the foe, and with a few tremendous strokes cleared
the doorway, and shut-to the door.

Philammon was going to explain and thank, but Smid stopped his mouth.

‘Never mind, young one, you are our guest now. Come in, and you shall be
as welcome as ever. See what comes of running away from us at first.’

‘You do not seem to have benefited much by leaving me for the monks,’
said old Wulf. ‘Come in by the inner door. Smid! go and turn those monks
out of the gateway.’

But the mob, after battering the door for a few minutes, had yielded
to the agonised entreaties of Peter, who assured them that if those
incarnate fiends once broke out upon them, they would not leave a
Christian alive in Alexandria. So it was agreed to leave a few to watch
for Philammon’s coming out; and the rest, balked of their prey, turned
the tide of their wrath against the Prefect, and rejoined the mass
of their party, who were still hanging round his chariot, ready for
mischief.

In vain the hapless shepherd of the people attempted to drive on. The
apparitors were frightened and hung back; and without their help it
was impossible to force the horses through the mass of tossing arms and
beards in front. The matter was evidently growing serious.

‘The bitterest ruffians in all Nitria, your Excellency,’ whispered one
of the guards, with a pale face; ‘and two hundred of them at the least.
The very same set, I will be sworn, who nearly murdered Dioscuros.’

‘If you will not allow me to proceed, my holy brethren,’ said Orestes,
trying to look collected, ‘perhaps it will not be contrary to the canons
of the Church if I turn back. Leave the horses’ heads alone. Why, in
God’s name, what do you want?’

‘Do you fancy we have forgotten Hieracas?’ cried a voice from the rear;
and at that name, yell upon yell arose, till the mob, gaining courage
from its own noise, burst out into open threats. ‘Revenge for the
blessed martyr Hieracas!’ ‘Revenge for the wrongs of the Church!’ ‘Down
with the friend of Heathens, Jews, and Barbarians!’ ‘Down with the
favourite of Hypatia!’ ‘Tyrant!’ ‘Butcher!’ And the last epithet so
smote the delicate fancy of the crowd, that a general cry arose of
‘Kill the butcher!’ and one furious monk attempted to clamber into the
chariot. An apparitor tore him down, and was dragged to the ground in
his turn. The monks closed in. The guards, finding the enemy number ten
to their one, threw down their weapons in a panic, and vanished; and in
another minute the hopes of Hypatia and the gods would have been lost
for ever, and Alexandria robbed of the blessing of being ruled by the
most finished gentleman south of the Mediterranean, had it not been for
unexpected succour; of which it will be time enough, considering who and
what is in danger, to speak in a future chapter.



CHAPTER XVII: A STRAY GLEAM


THE last blue headland of Sardinia was fading fast on the north-west
horizon, and a steady breeze bore before it innumerable ships, the
wrecks of Heraclian’s armament, plunging and tossing impatiently in
their desperate homeward race toward the coast of Africa. Far and
wide, under a sky of cloudless blue, the white sails glittered on
the glittering sea, as gaily now, above their loads of shame and
disappointment terror and pain, as when, but one short month before,
they bore with them only wild hopes and gallant daring. Who can
calculate the sum of misery in that hapless flight?.... And yet it
was but one, and that one of the least known and most trivial, of the
tragedies of that age of woe; one petty death-spasm among the unnumbered
throes which were shaking to dissolution the Babylon of the West. Her
time had come. Even as Saint John beheld her in his vision, by agony
after agony, she was rotting to her well-earned doom. Tyrannising
it luxuriously over all nations, she had sat upon the mystic
beast--building her power on the brute animal appetites of her dupes and
slaves: but she had duped herself even more than them. She was finding
out by bitter lessons that it was ‘to the beast’, and not to her, that
her vassal kings of the earth had been giving their power and strength;
and the ferocity and lust which she had pampered so cunningly in them,
had become her curse and her destruction.... Drunk with the blood of the
saints; blinded by her own conceit and jealousy to the fact that she had
been crushing and extirpating out of her empire for centuries past all
which was noble, purifying, regenerative, divine, she sat impotent
and doting, the prey of every fresh adventurer, the slave of her own
slaves.... ‘And the kings of the earth, who had sinned with her, hated
the harlot, and made her desolate and naked, and devoured her flesh, and
burned her with fire. For God had put into their hearts to fulfil His
will, and to agree, and to give their kingdom to the beast, until the
words of God should be fulfilled.’.... Everywhere sensuality, division,
hatred, treachery, cruelty, uncertainty, terror; the vials of God’s
wrath poured out. Where was to be the end of it all? asked every man
of his neighbour, generation after generation; and received for answer
only, ‘It is better to die than to live.’

And yet in one ship out of that sad fleet, there was peace; peace amid
shame and terror; amid the groans of the wounded, and the sighs of
the starving; amid all but blank despair. The great triremes and
quinqueremes rushed onward past the lagging transports, careless, in the
mad race for safety, that they were leaving the greater number of their
comrades defenceless in the rear of the flight; but from one little
fishing-craft alone no base entreaties, no bitter execrations greeted
the passing flash and roll of their mighty oars. One after another, day
by day, they came rushing up out of the northern offing, each like a
huge hundred-footed dragon, panting and quivering, as if with terror, at
every loud pulse of its oars, hurling the wild water right and left
with the mighty share of its beak, while from the bows some gorgon or
chimaera, elephant or boar, stared out with brazen eyes toward the coast
of Africa, as if it, too, like the human beings which it carried, was
dead to every care but that of dastard flight. Past they rushed, one
after another; and off the poop some shouting voice chilled all hearts
for a moment, with the fearful news that the Emperor’s Neapolitan fleet
was in full chase.... And the soldiers on board that little vessel
looked silently and steadfastly into the silent steadfast face of the
old Prefect, and Victoria saw him shudder, and turn his eyes away--and
stood up among the rough fighting men, like a goddess, and cried aloud
that ‘the Lord would protect His own’; and they believed her, and
were still; till many days and many ships were passed, and the little
fishing-craft, outstripped even by the transports and merchantmen, as it
strained and crawled along before its single square-sail, was left alone
upon the sea.

And where was Raphael Aben-Ezra?

He was sitting, with Bran’s head between his knees, at the door of a
temporary awning in the vessel’s stern, which shielded the wounded men
from sun and spray; and as he sat he could hear from within the tent the
gentle voices of Victoria and her brother, as they tended the sick like
ministering angels, or read to them words of divine hope and comfort-in
which his homeless heart felt that he had no share....

‘As I live, I would change places now with any one of those poor mangled
ruffians to have that voice speaking such words to me....and to believe
them.’.... And he went on perusing the manuscript which he held in his
hand. ...............

‘Well!’ he sighed to himself after a while ‘at least it is the most
complimentary, not to say hopeful, view of our destinies with which I
have met since I threw away my curse’s belief that the seed of David was
fated to conquer the whole earth, and set up a second Roman Empire
at Jerusalem, only worse than the present one, in that the devils of
superstition and bigotry would be added to those of tyranny and rapine.’

A hand was laid on his shoulder, and a voice asked’ ‘And what may this
so hopeful view be?’

‘Ah! my dear General!’ said Raphael, looking up. ‘I have a poor bill
of fare whereon to exercise my culinary powers this morning. Had it not
been for that shark who was so luckily deluded last night, I should have
been reduced to the necessity of stewing my friend the fat decurion’s
big boots.’

‘They would have been savoury enough, I will warrant, after they had
passed under your magical hand.’

‘It is a comfort, certainly, to find that after all one did learn
something useful in Alexandria! So I will even go forward at once, and
employ my artistic skill.’

‘Tell me first what it was about which I heard you just now
soliloquising, as so hopeful a view of some matter or other?’

‘Honestly--if you will neither betray me to your son and daughter,
nor consider me as having in anywise committed myself--it was Paul of
Tarsus’s notion of the history and destinies of our stiff-necked nation.
See what your daughter has persuaded me into reading!’ And he held up a
manuscript of the Epistle to the Hebrews.

‘It is execrable Greek. But it is sound philosophy, I cannot deny. He
knows Plato better than all the ladies and gentlemen in Alexandria put
together, if my opinion on the point be worth having.’

‘I am a plain soldier, and no judge on that point, sir. He may or may
not know Plato; but I am right sure that he knows God.’

‘Not too fast,’ said Raphael with a smile. ‘You do not know, perhaps,
that I have spent the last ten years of my life among men who professed
the same knowledge?’

‘Augustine, too, spent the best ten years of his life among such; and
yet he is now combating the very errors which he once taught.’

‘Having found, he fancies, something better!’

‘Having found it, most truly. But you must talk to him yourself, and
argue the matter over, with one who can argue. To me such questions are
an unknown land.’

‘Well.... Perhaps I may be tempted to do even that. At least a
thoroughly converted philosopher--for poor dear Synesius is half heathen
still, I often fancy, and hankers after the wisdom of the Egyptian--will
be a curious sight; and to talk with so famous and so learned a man
would always be a pleasure; but to argue with him, or any other human
being, none whatsoever.’

‘Why, then?’

‘My dear sir, I am sick of syllogisms, and probabilities, and pros and
contras. What do I care if, on weighing both sides, the nineteen pounds
weight of questionable arguments against, are overbalanced by the twenty
pounds weight of equally questionable arguments for? Do you not see that
my belief of the victorious proposition will be proportioned to the one
over-balancing pound only, while the whole other nineteen will go for
nothing?’

‘I really do not.’

‘Happy are you, then. I do, from many a sad experience. No, my worthy
sir. I want a faith past arguments; one which, whether I can prove it
or not to the satisfaction of the lawyers, I believe to my own
satisfaction, and act on it as undoubtingly and unreasoningly as I
do upon my own newly-rediscovered personal identity. I don’t want to
possess a faith. I want a faith which will possess me. And if I ever
arrived at such a one, believe me, it would be by some such practical
demonstration as this very tent has given me.’

‘This tent?’

‘Yes, sir, this tent; within which I have seen you and your children
lead a life of deeds as new to me the Jew, as they would be to Hypatia
the Gentile. I have watched you for many a day, and not in vain. When I
saw you, an experienced officer, encumber your flight with wounded men,
I was only surprised. But since I have seen you and your daughter,
and, strangest of all, your gay young Alcibiades of a son, starving
yourselves to feed those poor ruffians--performing for them, day and
night, the offices of menial slaves--comforting them, as no man ever
comforted me--blaming no one but yourselves, caring for every one but
yourselves, sacrificing nothing but yourselves; and all this without
hope of fame or reward, or dream of appeasing the wrath of any god or
goddess, but simply because you thought it right.... When I saw that,
sir, and more which I have seen; and when, reading in this book here,
I found most unexpectedly those very grand moral rules which you were
practising, seeming to spring unconsciously, as natural results, from
the great thoughts, true or false, which had preceded them; then, sir, I
began to suspect that the creed which could produce such deeds as I have
watched within the last few days, might have on its side not merely a
slight preponderance of probabilities, but what the Jews used once to
call, when we believed in it--or in anything--the mighty power of God.’

And as he spoke, he looked into the Prefect’s face with the look of a
man wrestling in some deadly struggle; so intense and terrible was the
earnestness of his eye, that even the old soldier shrank before it.

‘And therefore,’ he went on, ‘therefore, sir, beware of your own
actions, and of your children’s. If, by any folly or baseness, such as I
have seen in every human being whom I ever met as yet upon this accursed
stage of fools, you shall crush my new-budding hope that there is
something somewhere which will make me what I know that I ought to be,
and can be--If you shall crush that, I say, by any misdoing of yours,
you had better have been the murderer of my firstborn; with such a
hate--a hate which Jews alone can feel--will I hate you and yours.’

‘God help us and strengthen us!’ said the old warrior in a tone of noble
humility.

‘And now,’ said Raphael, glad to change the subject, after this unwonted
outburst, ‘we must once more seriously consider whether it is wise to
hold on our present course. If you return to Carthage, or to Hippo--’

‘I shall be beheaded.’

‘Most assuredly. And how much soever you may consider such an event a
gain to yourself, yet for the sake of your son and your daughter--’

‘My dear sir,’ interrupted the Prefect, ‘you mean kindly. But do not, do
not tempt me. By the Count’s side I have fought for thirty years, and by
his side I will die, as I deserve.’

‘Victorius! Victoria!’ cried Raphael; ‘help me! Your father,’ he went
on, as they came out from the tent, ‘is still decided on losing his own
head, and throwing away ours, by going to Carthage.’

‘For my sake--for our sakes--father!’ cried Victoria, clinging to him.

‘And for my sake, also, most excellent sir,’ said Raphael, smiling
quietly. ‘I have no wish to be so uncourteous as to urge any help which
I may have seemed to afford you. But I hope that you will recollect that
I have a life to lose, and that it is hardly fair of you to imperil it
as you intend to do. If you could help or save Heraclian, I should be
dumb at once. But now, for a mere point of honour to destroy fifty good
soldiers, who know not their right hands from their left--Shall I ask
their opinion?’

‘Will you raise a mutiny against me, sir?’ asked the old man sternly.

‘Why not mutiny against Philip drunk, in behalf of Philip sober? But
really, I will obey you.... only you must obey us.... What is Hesiod’s
definition of the man who will neither counsel himself nor be counselled
by his friends?.... Have you no trusty acquaintances in Cyrenaica, for
instance?’

The Prefect was silent.

‘Oh, hear us, my father! Why not go to Euodius? He is your old
comrade--a well-wisher, too, to this.... this expedition.... And
recollect, Augustine must be there now. He was about to sail for
Berenice, in order to consult Synesius and the Pentapolitan bishops,
when we left Carthage.’

And at the name of Augustine the old man paused.

‘Augustine will be there; true. And this our friend must meet him.
And thus at least I should have his advice. If he thinks it my duty to
return to Carthage, I can but do so, after all. But the soldiers!’

‘Excellent sir,’ said Raphael, ‘Synesius and the Pentapolitan
landlords--who can hardly call their lives their own, thanks to the
Moors--will be glad enough to feed and pay them, or any other brave
fellows with arms in their hands, at this moment. And my friend
Victorius, here, will enjoy, I do not doubt, a little wild campaigning
against marauding blackamoors.’

The old man bowed silently. The battle was won.

The young tribune, who had been watching his father’s face with the most
intense anxiety caught at the gesture, and hurrying forward, announced
the change of plan to the soldiery. It was greeted with a shout of joy,
and in another five minutes the sails were about, the rudder shifted,
and the ship on her way towards the western point of Sicily, before a
steady north-west breeze.

‘Ah!’ cried Victoria, delighted. ‘And now you will see Augustine! You
must promise me to talk to him!’

‘This, at least, I will promise, that whatsoever the great sophist shall
be pleased to say, shall meet with a patient hearing from a brother
sophist. Do not be angry at the term. Recollect that I am somewhat
tired, like my ancestor Solomon, of wisdom and wise men, having found
it only too like madness and folly. And you cannot surely expect me to
believe in man, while I do not yet believe in God?’

Victoria sighed. ‘I will not believe you. Why always pretend to be worse
than you are?’

‘That kind souls like you may be spared the pain of finding me worse
than I seem.... There, let us say no more; except that I heartily wish
that you would hate me!’

‘Shall I try?’

‘That must be my work, I fear, not yours. However, I shall give you good
cause enough before long’ doubt it not.’

Victoria sighed again, and retired into the tent to nurse the sick.

‘And now, sir,’ said the Prefect, turning to Raphael and his son; ‘do
not mistake me. I may have been weak, as worn-out and hopeless men are
wont to be; but do not think of me as one who has yielded to adversity
in fear for his own safety. As God hears me, I desire nothing better
than to die; and I only turn out of my course on the understanding that
if Augustine so advise, my children hold me free to return to Carthage
and meet my fate. All I pray for is, that my life may be spared until I
can place my dear child in the safe shelter of a nunnery.’

‘A nunnery?’

‘Yes, indeed; I have intended ever since her birth to dedicate her to
the service of God. And in such times as these, what better lot for a
defenceless girl?’

‘Pardon me!’ said Raphael; ‘but I am too dull to comprehend what
benefit or pleasure your Deity will derive from the celibacy of your
daughter.... Except, indeed, on one supposition, which, as I have some
faint remnants of reverence and decency reawakening in me just now, I
must leave to be uttered only by the pure lips of sexless priests.’

‘You forget, sir, that you are speaking to a Christian.’

‘I assure you, no! I had certainly been forgetting it till the last two
minutes, in your very pleasant and rational society. There is no danger
henceforth of my making so silly a mistake.’

‘Sir!’ said the Prefect, reddening at the undisguised contempt of
Raphael’s manner...., ‘When you know a little more of St. Paul’s
Epistles, you will cease to insult the opinions and feelings of those
who obey them, by sacrificing their most precious treasures to God.’

‘Oh, it is Paul of Tarsus, then, who gives you the advice! I thank you
for informing me of the fact; for it will save me the trouble of any
future study of his works. Allow me, therefore, to return by your hands
this manuscript of his with many thanks from me to that daughter of
yours, by whose perpetual imprisonment you intend to give pleasure to
your Deity. Henceforth the less communication which passes between me
and any member of your family, the better.’ And he turned away.

‘But, my dear sir!’ said the honest soldier, really chagrined, ‘you must
not!--we owe you too much, and love you too well, to part thus for the
caprice of a moment. If any word of mine has offended you--forget it,
and forgive me, I beseech you!’ and he caught both Raphael’s hands in
his own.

‘My very dear sir,’ answered the Jew quietly; ‘let me ask the same
forgiveness of you; and believe me, for the sake of past pleasant
passages, I shall not forget my promise about the mortgage.... But-here
we must part. To tell you the truth, I half an hour ago was fearfully
near becoming neither more nor less than a Christian. I had actually
deluded myself into the fancy that the Deity of the Galileans might be,
after all, the God of our old Hebrew forefathers--of Adam and Eve, of
Abraham and David, and of the rest who believed that children and
the fruit of the womb were an heritage and gift which cometh of the
Lord--and that Paul was right--actually right--in his theory that the
church was the development and fulfilment of our old national polity....
I must thank you for opening my eyes to a mistake which, had I not been
besotted for the moment, every monk and nun would have contradicted by
the mere fact of their existence, and reserve my nascent faith for some
Deity who takes no delight in seeing his creature: stultify the primary
laws of their being. Farewell!’

And while the Prefect stood petrified with astonishment, he retired to
the further extremity of the deck, muttering to himself--

‘Did I not know all along that this gleam was too sudden and too bright
to last? Did I not know that he, too, would prove himself like all the
rest--an ass?.... Fool! to have looked for common sense on such an earth
as this!.... Back to chaos again, Raphael Aben-Ezra, and spin ropes of
sand to the end of the farce!’

And mixing with the soldiers, he exchanged no word with the Prefect and
his children, till they reached the port of Berenice; and then putting
the necklace into Victoria’s hands, vanished among the crowds upon the
quay, no one knew whither.



CHAPTER XVIII: THE PREFECT TESTED


WHEN we lost sight of Philammon, his destiny had hurled him once more
among his old friends the Goths, in search of two important elements of
human comfort, freedom and a sister. The former be found at once, in a
large hall where sundry Goths were lounging and toping, into the nearest
corner of which he shrank, and stood, his late terror and rage forgotten
altogether in the one new and absorbing thought--His sister might be in
that house!.... and yielding to so sweet a dream, he began fancying to
himself which of all those gay maidens she might be who had become in
one moment more dear, more great to him, than all things else in heaven
or earth. That fair-haired, rounded Italian? That fierce, luscious,
aquiline-faced Jewess? That delicate, swart, sidelong-eyed Copt? No.
She was Athenian, like himself. That tall, lazy Greek girl, then, from
beneath whose sleepy lids flashed, once an hour, sudden lightnings,
revealing depths of thought and feeling uncultivated, perhaps even
unsuspected, by their possessor. Her? Or that, her seeming sister? Or
the next?.... Or--Was it Pelagia herself, most beautiful and most
sinful of them all? Fearful thought! He blushed scarlet at the bare
imagination: yet why, in his secret heart, was that the most pleasant
hypothesis of them all? And suddenly flashed across him that observation
of one of the girls on board the boat, on his likeness to Pelagia.
Strange, that he had never recollected it before! It must be so! and
yet on what a slender thread, woven of scattered hints and surmises,
did that ‘must’ depend! He would be sane! he would wait; he would
have patience. Patience, with a sister yet unfound, perhaps perishing?
Impossible!

Suddenly the train of his thoughts was changed perforce:--

‘Come! come and see! There’s a fight in the streets,’ called one of the
damsels down the stairs, at the highest pitch of her voice.

‘I shan’t go,’ yawned a huge fellow, who was lying on his back on a
sofa.

‘Oh come up, my hero,’ said one of the girls. ‘Such a charming riot, and
the Prefect himself in the middle of it! We have not had such a one in
the street this month.’

‘The princes won’t let me knock any of these donkey-riders on the
head, and seeing other people do it only makes me envious. Give me the
wine-jug--curse the girl! she has run upstairs!’

The shouting and trampling came nearer; and in another minute Wulf came
rapidly downstairs, through the hall into the harem-court, and into the
presence of the Amal.

‘Prince--here is a chance for us. These rascally Greeks are murdering
their Prefect under our very windows.’

‘The lying cur! Serve him right for cheating us. He has plenty of
guards. Why can’t the fool take care of himself?’

‘They have all run away, and I saw some of them hiding among the mob. As
I live, the man will be killed in five minutes more.’

‘Why not?’

‘Why should he, when we can save him and win his favour for ever? The
men’s fingers are itching far a fight; it’s a bad plan not to give
hounds blood now and then, or they lose the knack of hunting.’

‘Well, it wouldn’t take five minutes.’

‘And heroes should show that they can forgive when an enemy is in
distress.’

‘Very true! Like an Amal too!’ And the Amal sprang up and shouted to his
men to follow him.

‘Good-bye, my pretty one. Why, Wulf,’ cried he, as he burst out into the
court, ‘here’s our monk again! By Odin, you’re welcome, my handsome boy!
come along and fight too, young fellow; what were those arms given you
for?’

‘He is my man,’ said Wulf, laying his hand on Philammon’s shoulder,
‘and blood he shall taste.’ And out the three hurried, Philammon, in his
present reckless mood, ready for anything.

‘Bring your whips. Never mind swords. Those rascals are not worth it,’
shouted the Amal, as he hurried down the passage brandishing his heavy
thong, some ten feet in length, threw the gate open, and the next moment
recoiled from a dense crush of people who surged in--and surged out
again as rapidly as the Goth, with the combined force of his weight
and arm, hewed his way straight through them, felling a wretch at every
blow, and followed up by his terrible companions.

They were but just in time. The four white blood-horses were plunging
and rolling over each other, and Orestes reeling in his chariot, with
a stream of blood running down his face, and the hands of twenty wild
monks clutching at him. ‘Monks again!’ thought Philammon and as he saw
among them more than one hateful face, which he recollected in Cyril’s
courtyard on that fatal night, a flush of fierce revenge ran through
him.

‘Mercy!’ shrieked the miserable Prefect--‘I am a Christian! I swear that
I am a Christian! the Bishop Atticus baptized me at Constantinople!’

‘Down with the butcher! down with the heathen tyrant, who refuses the
adjuration on the Gospels rather than be reconciled to the patriarch!
Tear him out of the chariot!’ yelled the monks.

The craven hound!’ said the Amal, stopping short, ‘I won’t help him!’
But in an instant Wulf rushed forward, and struck right and left; the
monks recoiled, and Philammon, burning to prevent so shameful a scandal
to the faith to which he still clung convulsively, sprang into the
chariot and caught Orestes in his arms.

‘You are safe, my lord; don’t struggle,’ whispered he, while the monks
flew on him. A stone or two struck him, but they only quickened his
determination, and in another moment the whistling of the whips round
his head, and the yell and backward rush of the monks, told him that he
was safe. He carried his burden safely within the doorway of Pelagia’s
house, into the crowd of peeping and shrieking damsels, where twenty
pairs of the prettiest hands in Alexandria seized on Orestes, and drew
him into the court.

‘Like a second Hylas, carried off by the nymphs!’ simpered he, as he
vanished into the harem, to reappear in five minutes, his head bound rip
with silk handkerchiefs, and with as much of his usual impudence as he
could muster.

‘Your Excellency--heroes all--I am your devoted slave. I owe you life
itself; and more, the valour of your succour is only surpassed by the
deliciousness of your cure. I would gladly undergo a second wound to
enjoy a second time the services of such hands, and to see such feet
busying themselves on my behalf.’

‘You wouldn’t have said that five minutes ago, quoth the Amal, looking
at him very much as a bear might at a monkey.

‘Never mind the hands and feet, old fellow, they are none of yours!’
bluntly observed a voice from behind’ probably Smid’s, and a laugh
ensued.

‘My saviours, my brothers!’ said Orestes, politely ignoring the
laughter. ‘How can I repay you? Is there anything in which my office
here enables me--I will not say to reward, for that would be a term
beneath your dignity as free barbarians--but to gratify you?’

‘Give us three days’ pillage of the quarter!’ shouted some one.

‘Ah, true valour is apt to underrate obstacles; you forget your small
numbers.’

‘I say,’ quoth the Amal--‘I say, take care, Prefect.--If you mean to
tell me that we forty couldn’t cut all the throats in Alexandria in
three days, and yours into the bargain, and keep your soldiers at bay
all the time--’

‘Half of them would join us!’ cried some one. ‘They are half our own
flesh and blood after all!’

‘Pardon me, my friends, I do not doubt it a moment. I know enough of the
world never to have found a sheep-dog yet who would not, on occasion,
help to make away with a little of the mutton which he guarded. Eh, my
venerable sir?’ turning to Wulf with a knowing bow.

Wulf chuckled grimly, and said something to the Amal in German about
being civil to guests.

‘You will pardon me, my heroic friends,’ said Orestes, ‘but, with your
kind permission, I will observe that I am somewhat faint and disturbed
by late occurrences. To trespass on your hospitality further would be
an impertinence. If, therefore, I might send a slave to find some of my
apparitors-’

‘No, by all the gods!’ roared the Amal, ‘you’re my guest now--my lady’s
at least. And no one ever went out of my house sober yet if I could help
it. Set the cooks to work, my men! The Prefect shall feast with us like
an emperor, and we’ll send him home to-night as drunk as he can wish.
Come along, your Excellency; we’re rough fellows, we Goths; but by the
Valkyrs, no one can say that we neglect our guests!’

‘It is a sweet compulsion,’ said Orestes, as he went in.

‘Stop, by the bye! Didn’t one of you men catch a monk.?’

‘Here he is, prince, with his elbows safe behind him.’ And a tall,
haggard, half-naked monk was dragged forward.

‘Capital! bring him in. His Excellency shall judge him while dinner’s
cooking’ and Smid shall have the hanging of him. He hurt nobody in the
scuffle; he was thinking of his dinner.’

‘Some rascal bit a piece out of my leg, and I tumbled down,’ grumbled
Smid.

‘Well, pay out this fellow for it, then. Bring a chair, slaves! Here,
your Highness, sit there and judge.’

‘Two chairs!’ said some one; ‘the Amal shan’t stand before the emperor
himself.’

‘By all means, my dear friends. The Amal and I will act as the two
Caesars, with divided empire. I presume we shall have little difference
of opinion as to the hanging of this worthy.’

‘Hanging’s too quick for him.’

‘Just what I was about to remark--there are certain judicial
formalities, considered generally to be conducive to the stability, if
not necessary to the existence, of the Roman empire--’

‘I say, don’t talk so much,’ shouted a Goth, ‘If you want to have the
hanging of him yourself, do. We thought we would save you trouble.’

‘Ah, my excellent friend, would you rob me of the delicate pleasure of
revenge? I intend to spend at least four hours to-morrow in killing this
pious martyr. He will have a good time to think, between the beginning
and the end of the rack.’

‘Do you hear that, master monk?’ said Smid, chucking him under the
chin, while the rest of the party seemed to think the whole business
an excellent joke, and divided their ridicule openly enough between the
Prefect and his victim.

‘The man of blood has said it. I am a martyr,’ answered the monk in a
dogged voice.

‘You will take a good deal of time in becoming one.’

‘Death may be long, but glory is everlasting.’

‘True. I forgot that, and will save you the said glory, if I can help
it, for a year or two. Who was it struck me with the stone?’

No answer.

‘Tell me, and the moment he is in my lictors’ hands I pardon you
freely.’

The monk laughed. ‘Pardon? Pardon me eternal bliss, and the things
unspeakable, which God has prepared for those who love Him? Tyrant and
butcher! I struck thee, thou second Dioclesian--I hurled the stone--I,
Ammonius. Would to heaven that it had smitten thee through, thou Sisera,
like the nail of Jael the Kenite!’

‘Thanks, my friend. Heroes, you have a cellar for monks as well as for
wine? I will trouble you with this hero’s psalm-singing tonight, and
send my apparitors for him in the morning.’

‘If he begins howling when we are in bed, your men won’t find much of
him left in the morning,’ said the Amal. ‘But here come the slaves,
announcing dinner.’

‘Stay,’ said Orestes; ‘there is one more with whom I have an account to
settle--that young philosopher there.’

‘Oh, he is coming in, too. He never was drunk in his life, I’ll warrant,
poor fellow, and it’s high time for him to begin.’ And the Amal laid
a good-natured bear’s paw on Philammon’s shoulder, who hung back in
perplexity, and cast a piteous look towards Wulf.

Wulf answered it by a shake of the head which gave Philammon courage
to stammer out a courteous refusal. The Amal swore an oath at him which
made the cloister ring again, and with a quiet shove of his heavy hand,
sent him staggering half across the court: but Wulf interposed.

‘The boy is mine, prince. He is no drunkard, and I will not let him
become one. Would to heaven,’ added he, under his breath, ‘that I could
say the same to some others. Send us out our supper here, when you are
done. Half a sheep or so will do between us, and enough of the strongest
to wash it down with. Smid knows my quantity.’

‘Why in heaven’s name are you not coming in?’

‘That mob will be trying to burst the gates again before two hours are
out; and as some one must stand sentry, it may as well be a man who will
not have his ears stopped up by wine and women’s kisses. The boy will
stay with me.’

So the party went in, leaving Wulf and Philammon alone in the outer
hall.

There the two sat for some half hour, casting stealthy glances at each
other, and wondering perhaps, each of them vainly enough, what was going
on in the opposite brain. Philammon, though his heart was full of his
sister, could not help noticing the air of deep sadness which hung about
the scarred and weather-beaten features of the old warrior. The grimness
which he had remarked on their first meeting seemed to be now changed
into a settled melancholy. The furrows round his mouth and eyes had
become deeper and sharper. Some perpetual indignation seemed smouldering
in the knitted brow and protruding upper lip. He sat there silent and
motionless for some half hour, his chin resting on his hands, and
they again upon the butt of his axe, apparently in deep thought, and
listening with a silent sneer to the clinking of glasses and dishes
within.

Philammon felt too much respect, both for his age and his stately
sadness, to break the silence. At last some louder burst of merriment
than usual aroused him.

‘What do you call that?’ said he, speaking in Greek.

‘Folly and vanity.’

‘And what does she there--the Alruna--the prophet-woman, call it?’

‘Whom do you mean?’

‘Why, the Greek woman whom we went to hear talk this morning.’

‘Folly and vanity.’

‘Why can’t she cure that Roman hairdresser there of it, then?’

Philammon was silent--‘Why not, indeed!’

‘Do you think she could cure any one of it?’

‘Of what?’

‘Of getting drunk, and wasting their strength and their fame, and their
hard-won treasures upon eating and drinking, and fine clothes, and bad
women.’

‘She is most pure herself, and she preaches purity to all who hear her.’

‘Curse preaching. I have preached for these four months.’

‘Perhaps she may have some more winning arguments--perhaps--’

‘I know. Such a beautiful bit of flesh and blood as she is might get a
hearing, when a grizzled old head-splitter like me was called a dotard.
Eh? Well. It’s natural.’

A long silence.

‘She is a grand woman. I never saw such a one, and I have seen many.
There was a prophetess once, lived in an island in the Weser-stream--and
when a man saw her, even before she spoke a word, one longed to crawl
to her feet on all fours, and say, “There, tread on me; I am not fit for
you to wipe your feet upon.” And many a warrior did it.... Perhaps I may
have done it myself, before now .... And this one is strangely like her.
She would make a prince’s wife, now.’

Philammon started. What new feeling was it, which made him indignant at
the notion?

‘Beauty? What’s body without soul? What’s beauty without wisdom? What’s
beauty without chastity? Best! fool! wallowing in the mire which every
hog has fouled!’

‘Like a jewel of gold in a swine’s snout, so is a fair woman who is
without discretion.’

‘Who said that?’

‘Solomon, the king of Israel.’

‘I never heard of him. But he was a right Sagaman, whoever said it. And
she is a pure maiden, that other one?’

‘Spotless as the’--blessed Virgin, Philammon was going to say--but
checked himself. There were sad recollections about the words.

Wulf sat silent for a few minutes, while Philammon’s thoughts reverted
at once to the new purpose for which alone life seemed worth having....
To find his sister! That one thought had in a few hours changed and
matured the boy into the man. Hitherto he had been only the leaf before
the wind, the puppet of every new impression; but now circumstance,
which had been leading him along in such soft fetters for many a month,
was become his deadly foe; and all his energy and cunning, all his
little knowledge of man and of society, rose up sturdily and shrewdly
to fight in this new cause. Wulf was now no longer a phenomenon to be
wondered at, but an instrument to be used. The broken hints which he had
just given of discontent with Pelagia’s presence inspired the boy with
sudden hope, and cautiously he began to hint at the existence of persons
who would be glad to remove her. Wulf caught at the notion, and replied
to it with searching questions, till Philammon, finding plain speaking
the better part of cunning, told him openly the whole events of the
morning, and the mystery which Arsenius had half revealed, and then
shuddered with mingled joy and horror, as Wulf, after ruminating over
the matter for a weary five minutes, made answer--

‘And what if Pelagia herself were your sister?’

Philammon was bursting forth in some passionate answer, when the old man
stopped him and went on slowly, looking him through and through--

‘Because, when a penniless young monk claims kin with a woman who is
drinking out of the wine-cups of the Caesars, and filling a place for
a share of which kings’ daughters have been thankful--and will be again
before long--why then, though an old man may be too good-natured to call
it all a lie at first sight, he can’t help supposing that the young monk
has an eye to his own personal profit, eh?’

‘My profit?’ cried poor Philammon, starting up. ‘Good God! what object
on earth can I have, but to rescue her from this infamy to purity and
holiness?’

He had touched the wrong chord.

‘Infamy? you accursed Egyptian slave!’ cried the prince, starting up in
his turn, red with passion, and clutching at the whip which hung
over his head. ‘Infamy? As if she, and you too, ought not to consider
yourselves blest in her being allowed to wash the feet of an Amal!’

‘Oh’ forgive me!’ said Philammon, terrified at the fruits of his own
clumsiness. ‘But you forget--you forget, she is not married to him!’

‘Married to him? A freedwoman? No; thank Freya! he has not fallen as
low as that, at least: and never shall, if I kill the witch with my own
hands. A freedwoman!’

Poor Philammon! And he had been told but that morning that he was a
slave. He hid his face in his hands, and burst into an agony of tears.

‘Come, come,’ said the testy warrior, softened at once. ‘Woman’s tears
don’t matter, but somehow I never could bear to make a man cry. When you
are cool, and have learnt common courtesy, we’ll talk more about this.
So! Hush; enough is enough. Here comes the supper, and I am as hungry as
Loke.’

And he commenced devouring like his namesake’ ‘the gray beast of the
wood,’ and forcing, in his rough hospitable way, Philammon to devour
also much against his will and stomach.

‘There. I feel happier now!’ quoth Wulf, at last. ‘There is nothing
to be done in this accursed place but to eat. I get no fighting, no
hunting. I hate women as they hate me. I don’t know anything indeed,
that I don’t hate, except eating and singing. And now, what with those
girls’ vile unmanly harps and flutes, no one cares to listen to a true
rattling warsong. There they are at it now, with their caterwauling,
squealing all together like a set of starlings on a foggy morning! We’ll
have a song too, to drown the noise.’ And he burst out with a wild rich
melody, acting, in uncouth gestures and a suppressed tone of voice, the
scene which the words described--

An elk looked out of the pine forest He snuffed up east, he snuffed down
west, Stealthy and still.

His mane and his horns were heavy with snow; I laid my arrow across my
bow, Stealthy and still.

And then quickening his voice, as his whole face blazed up into fierce
excitement--

The bow it rattled’ the arrow flew, It smote his blade-bones through and
through, Hurrah!

I sprang at his throat like a wolf of the wood, And I warmed my hands in
the smoking blood, Hurrah!

And with a shout that echoed and rang from wall to wall, and pealed
away above the roofs, he leapt to his feet with a gesture and look of
savage frenzy which made Philammon recoil. But the passion was gone in
an instant, and Wulf sat down again chuckling to himself--

‘There--that is something like a warrior’s song. That makes the old
blood spin along again! But this debauching furnace of a climate! no man
can keep his muscle, or his courage, or his money, or anything else in
it. May the gods curse the day when first I saw it!’

Philammon said nothing, but sat utterly aghast at an outbreak so unlike
Wulf’s usual caustic reserve and stately self-restraint, and shuddering
at the thought that it might be an instance of that daemoniac
possession to which these barbarians were supposed by Christians and by
Neo-Platonists to be peculiarly subject. But the horror was not yet at
its height; for in another minute the doors of the women’s court flew
open, and, attracted by Wulf’s shout, out poured the whole Bacchanalian
crew, with Orestes, crowned with flowers, and led by the Amal and
Pelagia, reeling in the midst, wine-cup in hand.

‘There is my philosopher, my preserver, my patron saint!’ hiccupped he.
‘Bring him to my arms, that I may encircle his lovely neck with pearls
of India, and barbaric gold!’

‘For God’s sake let me escape!’ whispered he to Wulf, as the rout rushed
upon him. Wulf opened the door in an instant, and he dashed through it.
As he wen, the old man held out his hand--

‘Come and see me again, boy!--Me only. The old warrior will not hurt
you!’

There was a kindly tone in the voice, a kindly light in the eye, which
made Philammon promise to obey. He glanced one look back through the
gateway as he fled, and just saw a wild whirl of Goths and girls,
spinning madly round the court in the world-old Teutonic waltz; while,
high above their heads, in the uplifted arms of the mighty Amal, was
tossing the beautiful figure of Pelagia, tearing the garland from her
floating hair to pelt the dancers with its roses. And that might be his
sister! He hid his face and fled, and the gate shut out the revellers
from his eyes; and it is high time that it should shut them out from
ours also.

Some four hours more had passed. The revellers were sleeping off their
wine, and the moon shining bright and cold across the court, when Wulf
came out, carrying a heavy jar of wine, followed by Smid, a goblet in
each hand.

‘Here, comrade, out into the middle, to catch a breath of night-air. Are
all the fools asleep?’

‘Every mother’s son of them. Ah! this is refreshing after that room.
What a pity it is that all men are not born with heads like ours!’

‘Very sad indeed,’ said Wulf, filling his goblet.

‘What a quantity of pleasure they lose in this life! There they are,
snoring like hogs. Now, you and I are good to finish this jar, at
least.’

‘And another after it, if our talk is not over by that time.’

‘Why, are you going to hold a council of war?’

‘That is as you take it. Now, look here, Smid. Whomsoever I cannot
trust, I suppose I may trust you, eh?’

‘Well!’ quoth Smid surlily, putting down his goblet, ‘that is a strange
question to ask of a man who has marched, and hungered, and plundered,
and conquered, and been well beaten by your side for five-and-twenty
years, through all lands between the Wesel and Alexandria!’

‘I am growing old, I suppose, and so I suspect every one. But hearken
to me, for between wine and ill-temper out it must come. You saw that
Alruna-woman?’

‘Of course.’

‘Well?’

‘Well?’

‘Why, did not you think she would make a wife for any man?’

‘Well?’

‘And why not for our Amal?’

‘That’s his concern as well as hers, and hers as well as ours.’

‘She? Ought she not to think herself only too much honoured by marrying
a son of Odin? Is she going to be more dainty than Placidia?’

‘What was good enough for an emperor’s daughter must be good enough for
her.’

‘Good enough? And Adolf only a Balt, while Amalric is a full-blooded
Amal--Odin’s son by both sides?’

‘I don’t know whether she would understand that.’

‘Then we would make her. Why not carry her off, and marry her to the
Amal whether she chose or not? She would be well content enough with him
in a week, I will warrant.’

‘But there is Pelagia in the way.’

‘Put her out of the way, then.’

‘Impossible.’

‘It was this morning; a week hence it may not be. I heard a promise made
to-night which will do it, if there be the spirit of a Goth left in the
poor besotted lad whom we know of.’

‘Oh, he is all right at heart; never fear him. But what was the
promise?’

‘I will not tell till it is claimed. I will not be the man to shame
my own nation and the blood of the gods. But if that drunken Prefect
recollects it--why let him recollect it. And what is more, the monk-boy
who was here to-night--’

‘Ah, what a well-grown lad that is wasted!’

‘More than suspects--and if his story is true, I more than suspect
too--that Pelagia is his sister.’

‘His sister! But what of that?’

‘He wants, of course, to carry her off and make a nun of her.’

‘You would not let him do such a thing to the poor child?’

‘If folks get in my way, Smid, they must go down. So much the worse for
them: but old Wulf was never turned back yet by man or beast, and he
will not be now.’

‘After all, it will serve the hussy right. But Amalric?’

‘Out of sight, out of mind.’

‘But they say the Prefect means to marry the girl.’

‘He? That scented ape? She would not be such a wretch.’

‘But he does intend; and she intends too. It is the talk of the whole
town. We should have to put him out of the way first.’

‘Why not? Easy enough’ and a good riddance for Alexandria. Yet if we
made away with him we should be forced to take the city too; and I doubt
whether we have hands enough for that.’

‘The guards might join us. I will go down to the barracks and try them,
if you choose’ to-morrow. I am a boon-companion with a good many of them
already. But after all, Prince Wulf--of course you are always right; we
all know that--but what’s the use of marrying this Hypatia to the Amal?’

‘Use?’ said Wulf, smiting down his goblet on the pavement. ‘Use? you
purblind old hamster-rat, who think of nothing but filling your own
cheek-pouches!--to give him a wife worthy of a hero, as he is, in spite
of all--a wife who will make him sober instead of drunk, wise instead
of a fool, daring instead of a sluggard--a wife who can command the rich
people for us, and give us a hold here, which if once we get, let us see
who will break it! Why, with those two ruling in Alexandria, we might be
masters of Africa in three months. We’d send to Spain for the Wendels,
to move on Carthage; we’d send up the Adriatic for the Longbeards to
land in Pentapolis; we’d sweep the whole coast without losing a man’ now
it is drained of troops by that fool Heraclian’s Roman expedition; make
the Wendels and Longbeards shake hands here in Alexandria; draw lots for
their shares of the coast’ and then--’

‘And then what?’

‘Why, when we had settled Africa, I would call out a crew of picked
heroes, and sail away south for Asgard--I’d try that Red Sea this
time--and see Odin face to face, or die searching for him.’

‘Oh!’ groaned Smid. ‘And I suppose you would expect me to come too,
instead of letting me stop halfway, and settle there among the dragons
and elephants. Well, well, wise men are like moorlands--ride as far as
you will on the sound ground, you are sure to come upon a soft place at
last. However, I will go down to the guards to-morrow, if my head don’t
ache.’

‘And I will see the boy about Pelagia. Drink to our plot!’

And the two old iron-heads drank on, till the stars paled out and the
eastward shadows of the cloister vanished in the blaze of dawn.



CHAPTER XIX: JEWS AGAINST CHRISTIANS


THE little porter, after having carried Arsenius’s message to Miriam,
had run back in search of Philammon and his foster-father; and not
finding them, had spent the evening in such frantic rushings to and fro,
as produced great doubts of his sanity among the people of the quarter.
At last hunger sent him home to supper; at which meal he tried to find
vent for his excited feelings in his favourite employment of beating his
wife. Whereon Miriam’s two Syrian slave-girls, attracted by her screams,
came to the rescue, threw a pail of water over him, and turned him out
of doors. He, nothing discomfited, likened himself smilingly to Socrates
conquered by Xantippe; and, philosophically yielding to circumstances,
hopped about like a tame magpie for a couple of hours at the entrance of
the alley, pouring forth a stream of light raillery on the passers-by,
which several times endangered his personal safety; till at last
Philammon, hurrying breathlessly home, rushed into his arms.

‘Hush! Hither with me! Your star still prospers. She calls for you.’

‘Who?’

‘Miriam herself. Be secret as the grave. You she will see and speak
with. The message of Arsenius she rejected in language which it is
unnecessary for philosophic lips to repeat. Come; but give her good
words-as are fit to an enchantress who can stay the stars in their
courses, and command the spirits of the third heaven.’

Philammon hurried home with Eudaimon. Little cared he now for Hypatia’s
warning against Miriam.... Was he not in search of a sister?

‘So’ you wretch, you are back again!’ cried one of the girls, as they
knocked at the outer door of Miriam’s apartments. ‘What do you mean by
bringing young men here at this time of night?’

‘Better go down, and beg pardon of that poor wife of yours. She has
been weeping and praying for you to her crucifix all the evening, you
ungrateful little ape!’

‘Female superstitions--but I forgive her. Peace, barbarian women!
I bring this youthful philosopher hither by your mistress’s own
appointment.’

‘He must wait, then, in the ante-room. There is a gentleman with my
mistress at present.’

So Philammon waited in a dark, dingy ante-room, luxuriously furnished
with faded tapestry, and divans which lined the walls; and fretted and
fidgeted, while the two girls watched him over their embroidery out of
the corners of their eyes, and agreed that he was a very stupid person
for showing no inclination to return their languishing glances.

In the meanwhile, Miriam, within, was listening, with a smile of grim
delight, to a swarthy and weather-beaten young Jew.

‘I knew, mother in Israel, that all depended on my pace; and night
and day I rode from Ostia toward Tarentum: but the messenger of the
uncircumcised was better mounted than I; I therefore bribed a certain
slave to lame his horse, and passed him by a whole stage on the second
day. Nevertheless, by night the Philistine had caught me up again, the
evil angels helping him; and my soul was mad within me.’

‘And what then, Jonadab Bar-Zebudah?’

‘I bethought me of Ehud, and of Joab also, when he was pursued by
Asahel, and considered much of the lawfulness of the deed, not being
a man of blood. Nevertheless, we were together in the darkness, and I
smote him.’

Miriam clapped her hands.

‘Then putting on his clothes, and taking his letters and credentials,
as was but reasonable, I passed myself off for the messenger of the
emperor, and so rode the rest of that journey at the expense of the
heathen; and I hereby return you the balance saved.’

‘Never mind the balance. Keep it, thou worthy son of Jacob. What next?’

‘When I came to Tarentum, I sailed in the galley which I had chartered
from certain sea-robbers. Valiant men they were, nevertheless, and kept
true faith with me. For when we had come halfway, rowing with all our
might, behold another galley coming in our wake and about to pass us by,
which I knew for an Alexandrian, as did the captain also, who assured me
that she had come from hence to Brundusium with letters from Orestes.’

‘Well?’

‘It seemed to me both base to be passed, and more base to waste all the
expense wherewith you and our elders had charged themselves; so I took
counsel with the man of blood, offering him over and above our bargain,
two hundred gold pieces of my own, which please to pay to my account
with Rabbi Ezekiel, who lives by the watergate in Pelusium. Then the
pirates, taking counsel, agreed to run down the enemy; for our galley
was a sharp-beaked Liburnian, while theirs was only a messenger
trireme.’

‘And you did it?’

‘Else had I not been here. They were delivered into our hands, so that
we struck them full in mid-length, and they sank like Pharaoh and his
host.’

‘So perish all the enemies of the nation!’ cried Miriam. ‘And now it is
impossible, you say, for fresh news to arrive for these ten days?’

‘Impossible, the captain assured me, owing to the rising of the wind,
and the signs of southerly storm.’

‘Here, take this letter for the Chief Rabbi, and the blessing of a
mother in Israel. Thou Last played the man for thy people; and thou
shalt go to the grave full of years and honours, with men-servants and
maid-servants, gold and silver, children and children’s children, with
thy foot on the necks of heathens, and the blessing of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, to eat of the goose which is fattening in the desert, and
the Leviathan which lieth in the great sea, to be meat for all true
Israelites at the last day.’

And the Jew turned and went out, perhaps, in his simple fanaticism, the
happiest man in Egypt at that moment.

He passed out through the ante-chamber, leering at the slave-girls, and
scowling at Philammon; and the youth was ushered into the presence of
Miriam.

She sat, coiled up like a snake on a divan writing busily in a tablet
upon her knees while on the cushions beside her glittered splendid
jewels, which she had been fingering over as a child might its toys.
She did not look up for a few minutes; and Philammon could not help, in
spite of his impatience, looking round the little room and contrasting
its dirty splendour, and heavy odour of wine, and food, and perfumes,
with the sunny grace and cleanliness of Greek houses. Against the
wall stood presses and chests fretted with fantastic Oriental carving;
illuminated rolls of parchment lay in heaps in a corner; a lamp of
strange form hung from the ceiling, and shed a dim and lurid light
upon an object which chilled the youth’s blood for a moment--a bracket
against the wall, on which, in a plate of gold, engraven with mystic
signs, stood the mummy of an infant’s head; one of those teraphim, from
which, as Philammon knew, the sorcerers of the East professed to evoke
oracular responses.

At last she looked up, and spoke in a shrill, harsh voice. ‘Well, my
fair boy, and what do you want with the poor old proscribed Jewess? Have
you coveted yet any of the pretty things which she has had the wit to
make her slave-demons save from the Christian robbers?’

Philammon’s tale was soon told. The old woman listened, watching him
intently with her burning eye; and then answered slowly--

‘Well, and what if you are a slave?’

‘Am I one, then? Am I?’

‘Of course you are. Arsenius spoke truth. I saw him buy you at Ravenna,
just fifteen years ago. I bought your sister at the same time. She is
two-and-twenty now. You were four years younger than her, I should say.’

‘Oh heavens! and you know my sister still! Is she Pelagia?’

‘You were a pretty boy,’ went on the hag, apparently not hearing him.
‘If I had thought you were going to grow up as beautiful and as
clever as you are, I would have bought you myself. The Goths were
just marching, and Arsenius gave only eighteen gold pieces for you--or
twenty--I am growing old, and forget everything, I think. But there
would have been the expense of your education, and your sister cost me
in training--oh what sums? Not that she was not worth the money--no, no,
the darling!’

‘And you know where she is? Oh tell me--in the name of mercy tell me!’

‘Why, then?’

‘Why, then? Have you not the heart of a human being in you? Is she not
my sister?’

‘Well? You have done very well for fifteen years without your
sister--why can you not do as well now? You don’t recollect her--you
don’t love her.’

‘Not love her? I would die for her--die for you if you will but help me
to see her!’

‘You would, would you? And if I brought you to her, what then! What if
she were Pelagia herself, what then? She is happy enough now, and rich
enough. Could you make her happier or richer?’

‘Can you ask? I must--I will--reclaim her from the infamy in which I am
sure she lives.’

‘Ah ha, sir monk! I expected as much. I know, none knows better, what
those fine words mean. The burnt child dreads the fire; but the burnt
old woman quenches it, you will find. Now listen. I do not say that you
shall not see her--I do not say that Pelagia herself is not the woman
whom you seek--but--you are in my power. Don’t frown and pout. I can
deliver you as a slave to Arsenius when I choose. One word from me to
Orestes, and you are in fetters as a fugitive.’

‘I will escape!’ cried he fiercely.

‘Escape me?’--She laughed, pointing to the teraph--‘Me, who, if you fled
beyond Kaf, or dived to the depths of the ocean, could make these dead
lips confess where you were, and command demons to bear you back to me
upon their wings! Escape me! Better to obey me, and see your sister.’

Philammon shuddered, and submitted. The spell of the woman’s eye, the
terror of her words, which he half believed, and the agony of longing,
conquered him, and he gasped out--

‘I will obey you--only--only--’

‘Only you are not quite a man yet, but half a monk still, eh? I must
know that before I help you, my pretty boy. Are you a monk still, or a
man?’

‘What do you mean?’

‘Ah, ha, ha!’ laughed she shrilly. ‘And these Christian dogs don’t know
what a man means? Are you a monk, then? leaving the man alone, as above
your understanding.’

‘I?--I am a student of philosophy.’

‘But no man?’

‘I am a man, I suppose.’

‘I don’t; if you had been, you would have been making love like a man to
that heathen woman many a month ago.’

‘I--to her?’

‘Yes, I-to her!’ Said Miriam, coarsely imitating his tone of shocked
humility. ‘I, the poor penniless boy-scholar, to her, the great, rich,
wise, worshipped she-philosopher, who holds the sacred keys of the inner
shrine of the east wind--and just because I am a man, and the handsomest
man in Alexandria, and she a woman, and the vainest woman in Alexandria;
and therefore I am stronger than she, and can twist her round my finger,
and bring her to her knees at my feet when I like, as soon I open my
eyes, and discover that I am a man. Eh, boy! Did she ever teach you that
among her mathematics and metaphysics, and gods and goddesses?’

Philammon stood blushing scarlet. The sweet poison had entered, and
every vein glowed with it for the first time in his life. Miriam saw her
advantage.

‘There, there--don’t be frightened at your new lesson. After all, I
liked you from the first moment I saw you, and asked the teraph about
you, and I got an answer--such an answer! You shall know it some day. At
all events, it set the poor old soft-hearted Jewess on throwing away her
money. Did you ever guess from whom your monthly gold piece came?’

Philammon started, and Miriam burst into loud, shrill laughter.

‘From Hypatia, I’ll warrant! From the fair Greek woman, of course--vain
child that you are--never thinking of the poor old Jewess.’

‘And did you? did you?’ gasped Philammon.

‘Have I to thank you, then, for that strange generosity?’

‘Not to thank me, but to obey me; for mind, I can prove your debt to me,
every obol, and claim it if I choose. But don’t fear; I won’t be hard on
you, just because you are in my power. I hate every one who is not so.
As soon as I have a hold on them, I begin to love them. Old folks, like
children, are fond of their own playthings.’

‘And I am yours, then?’ said Philammon fiercely.

‘You are indeed, my beautiful boy,’ answered she, looking up with so
insinuating a smile that he could not be angry. ‘After all, I know how
to toss my balls gently--and for these forty years I have only lived
to make young folks happy; so you need not be afraid of the poor
soft-hearted old woman. Now--you saved Orestes’s life yesterday.’

‘How did you find out that?’

‘I? I know everything. I know what the swallows say when they pass each
other on the wing, and what the fishes think of in the summer sea. You,
too, will be able to guess some day, without the teraph’s help. But
in the mean time you must enter Orestes’s service. Why?-What are you
hesitating about? Do you not know that you are high in his favour? He
will make you secretary--raise you to be chamberlain some day, if you
know how to make good use of your fortune.’

Philammon stood in astonished silence; and at last--

‘Servant to that man? What care I for him or his honours? Why do you
tantalise me thus? I have no wish on earth but to see my sister!’

‘You will be far more likely to see her if you belong to the court of
a great officer--perhaps more than an officer--than if you remain a
penniless monk. Not that I believe you. Your only wish on earth, eh? Do
you not care, then, ever to see the fair Hypatia again?’

‘I? Why should I not see her? Am I not her pupil?’

‘She will not have pupils much longer, my child. If you wish to hear
her wisdom--and much good may it do you--you must go for it henceforth
somewhat nearer to Orestes’s palace than the lecture-room is. Ah! you
start. Have I found you an argument now? No--ask no questions. I explain
nothing to monks. But take these letters; to-morrow morning at the
third hour go to Orestes’s palace, and ask for his secretary, Ethan the
Chaldee. Say boldly that you bring important news of state; and then
follow your star: it is a fairer one than you fancy. Go! obey me, or you
see no sister.’

Philammon felt himself trapped; but, after all, what might not this
strange woman do for him? It seemed, if not his only path, still his
nearest path to Pelagia; and in the meanwhile he was in the hag’s power,
and he must submit to his fate; so he took the letters and went out.

‘And so you think that you are going to have her?’ chuckled Miriam to
herself, when Philammon went out. ‘To make a penitent of her, eh?--a
nun, or a she-hermit; to set her to appease your God by crawling on all
fours among the mummies for twenty years, with a chain round her neck
and a clog at her ankle, fancying herself all the while the bride of the
Nazarene? And you think that old Miriam is going to give her up to you
for that? No, no, sir monk! Better she were dead!.... Follow your dainty
bait!--follow it, as the donkey does the grass which his driver offers
him, always an inch from his nose.... You in my power!--and Orestes in
my power!.... I must negotiate that new loan to-morrow, I suppose....
I shall never be paid. The dog will ruin me, after all! How much is it,
now? Let me see.’.... And she began fumbling in her escritoire, over
bonds and notes of hand. ‘I shall never be paid: but power!--to have
power! To see those heathen slaves and Christian hounds plotting and
vapouring, and fancying themselves the masters of the world, and
never dreaming that we are pulling the strings, and that they are our
puppets!--we, the children of the promises--we, The Nation--we, the seed
of Abraham! Poor fools! I could almost pity them, as I think of their
faces when Messiah comes, and they find out who were the true lords of
the world, after all!....He must be the Emperor of the South, though,
that Orestes; he must, though I have to lend him Raphael’s jewels to
make him so. For he must marry the Greek woman. He shall. She hates
him, of course.... So much the deeper revenge for me. And she loves that
monk. I saw it in her eyes there in the garden. So much the better for
me, too. He will dangle willingly enough at Orestes’s heels for the
sake of being near her--poor fool! We will make him secretary, or
chamberlain. He has wit enough for it, they say, or for anything. So
Orestes and he shall be the two jaws of my pincers, to squeeze what I
want out of that Greek Jezebel.. And then, then for the black agate!’

Was the end of her speech a bathos? Perhaps not; for as she spoke the
last word, she drew from her bosom, where it hung round her neck by a
chain, a broken talisman, exactly similar to the one which she coveted
so fiercely, and looked at it long and lovingly--kissed it--wept
over it--spoke to it--fondled it in her arms as a mother would a
child--murmured over it snatches of lullabies; and her grim, withered
features grew softer, purer, grander; and rose ennobled, for a moment,
to their long-lost might-have-been, to that personal ideal which every
soul brings with it into the world, which shines, dim and potential,
in the face of every sleeping babe, before it has been scarred, and
distorted, and encrusted in the long tragedy of life. Sorceress she was,
pander and slave-dealer, steeped to the lips in falsehood, ferocity, and
avarice; yet that paltry stone brought home to her some thought, true,
spiritual, impalpable, unmarketable, before which all her treasures and
all her ambition were as worthless in her own eyes as they were in the
eyes of the angels of God.

But little did Miriam think that at the same moment a brawny, clownish
monk was standing in Cyril’s private chamber, and, indulged with the
special honour of a cup of good wine in the patriarch’s very presence,
was telling to him and Arsenius the following history--

‘So I, finding that the Jews had chartered this pirate-ship, went to
the master thereof, and finding favour in his eyes, hired myself to row
therein, being sure, from what I had overheard from the Jews, that she
was destined to bring the news to Alexandria as quickly as possible.
Therefore, fulfilling the work which his Holiness had entrusted to my
incapacity, I embarked, and rowed continually among the rest; and being
unskilled in such labour, received many curses and stripes in the cause
of the Church--the which I trust are laid to my account hereafter.
Moreover, Satan entered into me, desiring to slay me, and almost tore
me asunder, so that I vomited much, and loathed all manner of meat.
Nevertheless, I rowed on valiantly, being such as I am, vomiting
continually, till the heathens were moved with wonder, and forbore to
beat me, giving me strong liquors in pity; wherefore I rowed all the
more valiantly day and night, trusting that by my unworthiness the cause
of the Catholic Church might be in some slight wise assisted.’

‘And so it is,’ quoth Cyril. ‘Why do you not sit down, man?’

‘Pardon me,’ quoth the monk, with a piteous gesture; ‘of sitting, as of
all carnal pleasure, cometh satiety at the last.’

‘And now’ said Cyril, ‘what reward am I to give you for your good
service?’

‘It is reward enough to know that I have done good service. Nevertheless
if the holy patriarch be so inclined without reason, there is an ancient
Christian, my mother according to the flesh--’

‘Come to me to-morrow, and she shall be well seen to. And mind--look to
it, if I make you not a deacon of the city when I promote Peter.’

The monk kissed his superior’s hand and withdrew. Cyril turned to
Arsenius, betrayed for once into geniality by his delight, and smiting
his thigh--


‘We have beaten the heathen for once, eh?’ And then, in the usual
artificial tone of an ecclesiastic--‘And what would my father recommend
in furtherance of the advantage so mercifully thrown into our hand?’

Arsenius was silent.

‘I,’ went on Cyril, ‘should be inclined to announce the news this very
night, in my sermon.’

Arsenius shook his head.

‘Why not? why not?’ asked Cyril impatiently.

‘Better to keep it secret till others tell it. Reserved knowledge is
always reserved strength; and if the man, as I hope he does not, intends
evil to the Church, let him commit himself before you use your knowledge
against him. True, you may have a scruple of conscience as to the
lawfulness of allowing a sin which you might prevent. To me it seems
that the sin lies in the will rather than in the deed, and that
sometimes--I only say sometimes--it may be a means of saving the sinner
to allow his root of iniquity to bear fruit, and fill him with his own
devices.’

‘Dangerous doctrine, my father.’

‘Like all sound doctrine--a savour of life or of death, according as it
is received. I have not said it to the multitude, but to a discerning
brother. And even politically speaking--let him commit himself, if he be
really plotting rebellion, and then speak, and smite his Babel tower.’

‘You think, then, that he does not know of Heraclian’s defeat already?’

‘If he does, he will keep it secret from the people; and our chances of
turning them suddenly will be nearly the same.’

‘Good. After all, the existence of the Catholic Church in Alexandria
depends on this struggle, and it is well to be wary. Be it so. It is
well for me that I have you for an adviser.’

And thus Cyril, usually the most impatient and intractable of plotters,
gave in, as wise men should, to a wiser man than himself, and made up
his mind to keep the secret, and to command the monk to keep it also.

Philammon, after a sleepless night, and a welcome visit to the public
baths, which the Roman tyranny, wiser in its generation than modern
liberty, provided so liberally for its victims, set forth to the
Prefect’s palace, and gave his message; but Orestes, who had been
of late astonishing the Alexandrian public by an unwonted display of
alacrity, was already in the adjoining Basilica. Thither the youth was
conducted by an apparitor, and led up the centre of the enormous hall,
gorgeous with frescoes and coloured marbles, and surrounded by aisles
and galleries, in which the inferior magistrates were hearing causes,
and doing such justice as the complicated technicalities of Roman law
chose to mete out. Through a crowd of anxious loungers the youth passed
to the apse of the upper end, in which the Prefect’s throne stood empty,
and then turned into aside chamber, where he found himself alone with
the secretary, a portly Chaldee eunuch, with a sleek pale face, small
pig’s eyes, and an enormous turban. The man of pen and paper took the
letter, opened it with solemn deliberation, and then, springing to
his feet, darted out of the room in most undignified haste, leaving
Philammon to wait and wonder. In half an hour he returned, his little
eyes growing big with some great idea.

‘Youth! your star is in the ascendant; you are the fortunate bearer of
fortunate news! His Excellency himself commands your presence.’ And the
two went out.

In another chamber, the door of which was guarded by armed men, Orestes
was walking up and down in high excitement, looking somewhat the worse
for the events of the past night, and making occasional appeals to a
gold goblet which stood on the table.

‘Ha! No other than my preserver himself! Boy, I will make your fortune.
Miriam says that you wish to enter my service.’

Philammon, not knowing what to say, thought the best answer would be to
bow as low as he could.

‘Ah, ha! Graceful, but not quite according to etiquette. You will soon
teach him, eh, Secretary? Now to business. Hand me the notes to sign and
seal. To the Prefect of the Stationaries--’

‘Here, your Excellency.’

‘To the Prefect of the Corn market--how many wheat-ships have you
ordered to be unladen?’

‘Two, your Excellency.’

‘Well, that will be largess enough for the time being. To the Defender
of the Plebs--the devil break his neck!’

‘He may be trusted, most noble; he is bitterly jealous of Cyril’s
influence. And moreover, he owes my insignificance much money.’

‘Good! Now the notes to the Gaol-masters, about the gladiators.’

‘Here, your Excellency.’

‘To Hypatia. No. I will honour my bride elect with my own illustrious
presence. As I live, here is a morning’s work for a man with a racking
headache!’

‘Your Excellency has the strength of seven. May you live for ever!’

And really, Orestes’s power of getting through business, when he chose,
was surprising enough. A cold head and a colder heart make many things
easy.

But Philammon’s whole soul was fixed on those words. ‘His bride
elect!’.... Was it that Miriam’s hints of the day before had raised some
selfish vision, or was it pity and horror at such a fate for her--for
his idol?--But he passed five minutes in a dream, from which he was
awakened by the sound of another and still dearer name.

‘And now, for Pelagia. We can but try.’

‘Your Excellency might offend the Goth.’

‘Curse the Goth! He shall have his choice of all the beauties in
Alexandria, and be count of Pentapolis if he likes. But a spectacle I
must have; and no one but Pelagia can dance Venus Anadyomene.’

Philammon’s blood rushed to his heart, and then back again to his brow,
as he reeled with horror and shame.

‘The people will be mad with joy to see her on the stage once more.
Little they thought, the brutes, how I was plotting for their amusement,
even when as drunk as Silenus.’

‘Your nobility only lives for the good of your slaves.’

‘Here, boy! So fair a lady requires a fair messenger. You shall enter on
my service at once, and carry this letter to Pelagia. Why?--why do you
not come and take it?’

‘To Pelagia?’ gasped the youth. ‘In the theatre? Publicly? Venus
Anadyomene?’

‘Yes, fool! Were you, too, drunk last night after all?’

‘She is my sister!’

‘Well, and what of that? Not that I believe you, you villain! So!’ said
Orestes, who comprehended the matter in an instant. ‘Apparitors!’

The door opened, and the guard appeared.

‘Here is a good boy who is inclined to make a fool of himself. Keep him
out of harm’s way for a few days. But don’t hurt him; for, after all, he
saved my life yesterday, when you scoundrels ran away.’

And, without further ado, the hapless youth was collared, and led down
a vaulted passage into the guard-room, amid the jeers of the guard, who
seemed only to owe him a grudge for his yesterday’s prowess, and showed
great alacrity in fitting him with a heavy set of irons; which done, he
was thrust head foremost into a cell of the prison, locked in and left
to his meditations.



CHAPTER XX: SHE STOOPS TO CONQUER


‘But, fairest Hypatia, conceive yourself struck in the face by a great
stone, several hundred howling wretches leaping up at you like wild
beasts--two minutes more, and you are torn limb from limb. What would
even you do in such a case?’

‘Let them tear me limb from limb, and die as I have lived.’

‘Ah, but--When it came to fact, and death was staring you in the face?’

‘And why should man fear death?’

‘Ahem! No, not death, of course; but the act of dying. That may be,
surely, under such circumstances, to say the least, disagreeable. If our
ideal, Julian the Great, found a little dissimulation necessary, and was
even a better Christian than I have ever pretended to be, till he found
himself able to throw off the mask, why should not I? Consider me as a
lower being than yourself,--one of the herd, if you will; but a penitent
member thereof, who comes to make the fullest possible reparation, by
doing any desperate deed on which you may choose to put him, and
prove myself as able and willing, if once I have the power, as Julian
himself.’

Such was the conversation which passed between Hypatia and Orestes half
an hour after Philammon had taken possession of his new abode.

Hypatia looked at the Prefect with calm penetration, not unmixed with
scorn and fear.

‘And pray what has produced this sudden change in your Excellency’s
earnestness? For four months your promises have been lying fallow.’ She
did not confess how glad she would have been at heart to see them lying
fallow still.

‘Because--This morning I have news; which I tell to you the first as
a compliment. We will take care that all Alexandria knows it before
sundown. Heraclian has conquered.’

‘Conquered?’ cried Hypatia, springing from her seat.

‘Conquered, and utterly destroyed the emperor’s forces at Ostia. So
says a messenger on whom I can depend. And even if the news should prove
false, I can prevent the contrary report from spreading, or what is the
use of being prefect? You demur? Do you not see that if we can keep the
notion alive but a week our cause is won?’

‘How so?’

‘I have treated already with all the officers of the city, and every
one of them has acted like a wise man, and given me a promise of help,
conditional of course on Heraclian’s success, being as tired as I am of
that priest-ridden court at Byzantium. Moreover, the stationaries are
mine already. So are the soldiery all the way up the Nile. Ah! you have
been fancying me idle for these four months, but--You forget that you
yourself were the prize of my toil. Could I be a sluggard with that goal
in sight?’

Hypatia shuddered, but was silent; and Orestes went on--

‘I have unladen several of the wheat-ships for enormous largesses of
bread: though those rascally monks of Tabenne had nearly forestalled my
benevolence, and I was forced to bribe a deacon or two, buy up the stock
they had sent down, and retail it again as my own. It is really most
officious of them to persist in feeding gratuitously half the poor of
the city! What possible business have they with Alexandria?’

‘The wish for popularity, I presume.’

‘Just so; and then what hold can the government have on a set of rogues
whose stomachs are filled without our help?’

‘Julian made the same complaint to the high priest of Galatia, in that
priceless letter of his.’

‘Ah, you will set that all right, you know, shortly. Then again, I do
not fear Cyril’s power just now. He has injured himself deeply, I am
happy to say, in the opinion of the wealthy and educated, by expelling
the Jews. And as for his mob, exactly at the right moment, the
deities--there are no monks here, so I can attribute my blessings to the
right source--have sent us such a boon as may put them into as good a
humour as we need.’

‘And what is that?’ asked Hypatia.

‘A white elephant.’

‘A white elephant?’

‘Yes,’ he answered, mistaking or ignoring the tone of her answer.
‘A real, live, white elephant; a thing which has not been seen in
Alexandria for a hundred years! It was passing through with two tame
tigers, as a present to the boy at Byzantium, from some hundred-wived
kinglet of the Hyperborean Taprobane, or other no-man’s-land in the
far East. I took the liberty of laying an embargo on them, and, after a
little argumentation and a few hints of torture, elephant and tigers are
at our service.’

‘And of what service are they to be?’

‘My dearest madam-- Conceive.... How are we to win the mob without a
show?.... When were there more than two ways of gaining either the whole
or part of the Roman Empire--by force of arms or force of trumpery? Can
even you invent a third? The former is unpleasantly exciting, and hardly
practicable just now. The latter remains, and, thanks to the white
elephant, may be triumphantly successful. I have to exhibit something
every week. The people are getting tired of that pantomime; and since
the Jews were driven out, the fellow has grown stupid and lazy, having
lost the more enthusiastic half of his spectators. As for horse-racing,
they are sick of it.... Now, suppose we announce, for the earliest
possible day--a spectacle--such a spectacle as never was seen before in
this generation. You and I--I as exhibitor, you as representative--for
the time being only--of the Vestals of old--sit side by side....
Some worthy friend has his instructions, when the people are beside
themselves with rapture, to cry, “Long live Orestes Caesar!”....Another
reminds them of Heraclian’s victory--another couples your name with
mine.... the people applaud.... some Mark Antony steps forward, salutes
me as Imperator, Augustus--what you will--the cry is taken up--I refuse
as meekly as Julius Caesar himself--am compelled, blushing, to accept
the honour--I rise, make an oration about the future independence of the
southern continent--union of Africa and Egypt--the empire no longer to
be divided into Eastern and Western, but Northern and Southern. Shouts
of applause, at two drachmas per man, shake the skies. Everybody
believes that everybody else approves, and follows the lead.... And the
thing is won.’

‘And pray,’ asked Hypatia, crushing down her contempt and despair, ‘how
is this to bear on the worship of the gods?

‘Why.... why,.... if you thought that people’s minds were sufficiently
prepared, you might rise in your turn, and make an oration--you can
conceive one. Set forth how these spectacles, formerly the glory of the
empire, had withered under Galilaean superstition.... How the only path
toward the full enjoyment of eye and ear was a frank return to those
deities, from whose worship they originally sprang, and connected with
which they could alone be enjoyed in their perfection.... But I need not
teach you how to do that which you have so often taught me: so now
to consider our spectacle, which, next to the largess, is the most
important part of our plans. I ought to have exhibited to them the monk
who so nearly killed me yesterday. That would indeed have been a triumph
of the laws over Christianity. He and the wild beasts might have given
the people ten minutes’ amusement. But wrath conquered prudence; and
the fellow has been crucified these two hours. Suppose, then, we had a
little exhibition of gladiators. They are forbidden by law, certainly.’

‘Thank Heaven, they are!’

‘But do you not see that is the very reason why we, to assert our own
independence, should employ them?’

‘No! they are gone. Let them never reappear to disgrace the earth.’

‘My dear lady, you must not in your present character say that in
public; lest Cyril should be impertinent enough to remind you that
Christian emperors and bishops put them down.’

Hypatia bit her lip, and was silent.

‘Well, I do not wish to urge anything unpleasant to you.... If we could
but contrive a few martyrdoms--but I really fear we must wait a year
or two longer, in the present state of public opinion, before we can
attempt that.’

‘Wait? wait for ever! Did not Julian--and he must be our model--forbid
the persecution of the Galilaeans, considering them sufficiently
punished by their own atheism and self-tormenting superstition?’

‘Another small error of that great man.--He should have recollected that
for three hundred years nothing, not even the gladiators themselves,
had been found to put the mob in such good humour as to see a few
Christians, especially young and handsome women, burned alive, or thrown
to the lions.’

Hypatia bit her lip once more. ‘I can hear no more of this, sir. You
forget that you are speaking to a woman.’

‘Most supreme wisdom,’ answered Orestes, in his blandest tone, ‘you
cannot suppose that I wish to pain your ears. But allow me to observe,
as a general theorem, that if one wishes to effect any purpose, it is
necessary to use the means; and on the whole, those which have been
tested by four hundred years’ experience will be the safest. I speak
as a plain practical statesman--but surely your philosophy will not
dissent?’

Hypatia looked down in painful thought. What could she answer? Was it
not too true? and had not Orestes fact and experience on his side?

‘Well, if you must--but I cannot have gladiators. Why not a--one of
those battles with wild beasts? They are disgusting enough but still
they are less inhuman than the others; and you might surely take
precautions to prevent the men being hurt.’

‘Ah! that would indeed be a scentless rose! If there is neither danger
nor bloodshed, the charm is gone. But really wild beasts are too
expensive just now; and if I kill down my present menagerie, I can
afford no more. Why not have something which costs no money, like
prisoners?’

‘What! do you rank human beings below brutes?’

‘Heaven forbid! But they are practically less expensive. Remember, that
without money we are powerless; we must husband our resources for the
cause of the gods.’

Hypatia was silent.

‘Now, there are fifty or sixty Libyan prisoners just brought in from
the desert. Why not let them fight an equal number of soldiers? They are
rebels to the empire, taken in war.’

‘Ah, then,’ said Hypatia, catching at any thread of self-justification,
‘their lives are forfeit in any case.’

‘Of course. So the Christians could not complain of us for that. Did
not the most Christian Emperor Constantine set some three hundred German
prisoners to butcher each other in the amphitheatre of Treves?’

‘But they refused, and died like heroes, each falling on his own sword.’

‘Ah--those Germans are always unmanageable. My guards, now, are just
as stiff-necked. To tell you the truth, I have asked them already to
exhibit their prowess on these Libyans, and what do you suppose they
answered?’

‘They refused, I hope.’

‘They told me in the most insolent tone that they were men, and not
stage-players; and hired to fight, and not to butcher. I expected a
Socratic dialogue after such a display of dialectic, and bowed myself
out.’

‘They were right.’

‘Not a doubt of it, from a philosophic point of view; from a practical
one they were great pedants, and I an ill-used master. However, I can
find unfortunate and misunderstood heroes enough in the prisons, who,
for the chance of their liberty, will acquit themselves valiantly
enough; and I know of a few old gladiators still lingering about the
wine-shops, who will be proud enough to give them a week’s training.
So that may pass. Now for some lighter species of representation to
follow--something more or less dramatic.’

‘You forget that you speak to one who trusts to be, as soon as she has
the power, the high-priestess of Athene, and who in the meanwhile is
bound to obey her tutor Julian’s commands to the priests of his day, and
imitate the Galilaeans as much in their abhorrence for the theatre as
she hopes hereafter to do in their care for the widow and the stranger.’

‘Far be it from me to impugn that great man’s wisdom. But allow me to
remark, that to judge by the present state of the empire, one has a
right to say that he failed.’

‘The Sun-God whom he loved took him to himself, too early, by a hero’s
death.’

‘And the moment he was removed, the wave of Christian barbarism rolled
back again into its old channel.’

‘Ah! had he but lived twenty years longer!’

‘The Sun-God, perhaps, was not so solicitous as we are for the success
of his high-priest’s project.’

Hypatia reddened--was Orestes, after all laughing in his sleeve at her
and her hopes?

‘Do not blaspheme!’ she said solemnly.

‘Heaven forbid! I only offer one possible explanation of a plain fact.
The other is, that as Julian was not going quite the right way to work
to restore the worship of the Olympians, the Sun-God found it expedient
to withdraw him from his post, and now sends in his place Hypatia the
philosopher, who will be wise enough to avoid Julian’s error, and not
copy the Galilaeans too closely, by imitating a severity of morals at
which they are the only true and natural adepts.’

‘So Julian’s error was that of being too virtuous? If it be so, let
me copy him, and fail like him. The fault will then not be mine, but
fate’s.’

‘Not in being too virtuous himself, most stainless likeness of Athene,
but in trying to make others so. He forgot one half of Juvenal’s great
dictum about “Panem and Circenses,” as the absolute and overruling
necessities of rulers. He tried to give the people the bread without the
games.... And what thanks he received for his enormous munificence,
let himself and the good folks of Antioch tell--you just quoted his
Misopogon--’

‘Ay-the lament of a man too pure for his age.’

‘Exactly so. He should rather have been content to keep his purity
to himself, and have gone to Antioch not merely as a philosophic
high-priest, with a beard of questionable cleanliness, to offer
sacrifices to a god in whom--forgive me--nobody in Antioch had
believed for many a year. If he had made his entrance with ten thousand
gladiators, and our white elephant, built a theatre of ivory and glass
in Daphne, and proclaimed games in honour of the Sun, or of any other
member of the Pantheon--’

‘He would have acted unworthily of a philosopher.’

‘But instead of that one priest draggling up, poor devil, through the
wet grass to the deserted altar with his solitary goose under his arm,
he would have had every goose in Antioch--forgive my stealing a pun
from Aristophanes--running open-mouthed to worship any god known or
unknown--and to see the sights.’

‘Well,’ said Hypatia, yielding perforce to Orestes’s cutting arguments.
‘Let us then restore the ancient glories of the Greek drama. Let us give
them a trilogy of Aeschylus or Sophocles.’

‘Too calm, my dear madam. The Eumenides might do certainly, or
Philoctetes, if we could but put Philoctetes to real pain, and make the
spectators sure that he was yelling in good earnest.’

‘Disgusting!’

‘But necessary, like many disgusting things.’

‘Why not try the Prometheus?’

‘A magnificent field for stage effect, certainly. What with those ocean
nymphs in their winged chariot, and Ocean on his griffin.... But I
should hardly think it safe to reintroduce Zeus and Hermes to the people
under the somewhat ugly light in which Aeschylus exhibits them.’

‘I forgot that,’ said Hypatia. ‘The Orestean trilogy will be best, after
all.’

‘Best? perfect--divine! Ah, that it were to be my fate to go down
to posterity as the happy man who once more revived Aeschylus’s
masterpieces on a Grecian stage! But--Is there not, begging the pardon
of the great tragedian, too much reserve in the Agamemnon for our modern
taste? If we could have the bath scene represented on the stage, and an
Agamemnon who could be really killed--though I would not insist on that,
because a good actor might make it a reason for refusing the part--but
still the murder ought to take place in public.’

‘Shocking! an outrage on all the laws of the drama. Does not even the
Roman Horace lay down as a rule the--_Nec pueros coram populo Medea
trucidet_?’

‘Fairest and wisest, I am as willing a pupil of the dear old Epicurean
as any man living--even to the furnishing of my chamber; of which fact
the Empress of Africa may some day assure herself. But we are not now
discussing the art of poetry, but the art of reigning; and, after all,
while Horace was sitting in his easy-chair, giving his countrymen good
advice, a private man, who knew somewhat better than he what the mass
admired, was exhibiting forty thousand gladiators at his mother’s
funeral.’

‘But the canon has its foundation in the eternal laws of beauty. It has
been accepted and observed.’

‘Not by the people for whom it was written. The learned Hypatia has
surely not forgotten, that within sixty years after the _Ars Poetica_
was written, Annaeus Seneca, or whosoever wrote that very bad tragedy
called the Medea, found it so necessary that she should, in despite of
Horace, kill her children before the people, that he actually made her
do it!’

Hypatia was still silent--foiled at every point, while Orestes ran on
with provoking glibness.

‘And consider, too, even if we dare alter Aeschylus a little, we could
find no one to act him.’

‘Ah, true! fallen, fallen days!’

‘And really, after all, omitting the questionable compliment to me, as
candidate for a certain dignity, of having my namesake kill his mother,
and then be hunted over the stage by furies--’

‘But Apollo vindicates and purifies him at last. What a noble occasion
that last scene would give for winning them hack to their old reverence
for the god!’

‘True, but at present the majority of spectators will believe more
strongly in the horrors of matricide and furies than in Apollo’s power
to dispense therewith. So that I fear must be one of your labours of the
future.’

‘And it shall be,’ said Hypatia. But she did not speak cheerfully.

‘Do you not think, moreover,’ went on the tempter, ‘that those old
tragedies might give somewhat too gloomy a notion of those deities whom
we wish to reintroduce--I beg pardon, to rehonour? The history of the
house of Atreus is hardly more cheerful, in spite of its beauty, than
one of Cyril’s sermons on the day of judgment, and the Tartarus prepared
for hapless rich people?’

‘Well,’ said Hypatia, more and more listlessly; ‘it might be more
prudent to show them first the fairer and more graceful side of the
old Myths. Certainly the great age of Athenian tragedy had its playful
reverse in the old comedy.’

‘And in certain Dionysiac sports and processions which shall be
nameless, in order to awaken a proper devotion for the gods in those who
might not be able to appreciate Aeschylus and Sophocles.’

‘You would not reintroduce them?’

‘Pallas forbid! but give as fair a substitute for them as we can.’

‘And are we to degrade ourselves because the masses are degraded?’

‘Not in the least. For my own part, this whole business, like the
catering for the weekly pantomimes, is as great a bore to me as it
could have been to Julian himself. But, my dearest madam--“Panem and
Circenses”--they must be put into good humour; and there is but one
way--by “the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eye, and the pride
of life,” as a certain Galilaean correctly defines the time-honoured
Roman method.’

‘Put them into good humour? I wish to lustrate them afresh for the
service of the gods. If we must have comic representations, we can only
have them conjoined to tragedy, which, as Aristotle defines it, will
purify their affections by pity and terror.’

Orestes smiled.

‘I certainly can have no objection to so good a purpose. But do you not
think that the battle between the gladiators and the Libyans will have
done that sufficiently beforehand? I can conceive nothing more fit for
that end, unless it be Nero’s method of sending his guards among the
spectators themselves, and throwing them down to the wild beasts in
the arena. How thoroughly purified by pity and terror must every worthy
shopkeeper have been, when he sat uncertain whether he might not follow
his fat wife into the claws of the nearest lion!’

‘You are pleased to be witty, sir,’ said Hypatia, hardly able to conceal
her disgust.

‘My dearest bride elect, I only meant the most harmless of _reductiones
ad absurdum_ of an abstract canon of Aristotle, with which I, who am a
Platonist after my mistress’s model, do not happen to agree. But do,
I beseech you, be ruled, not by me, but by your own wisdom. You cannot
bring the people to appreciate your designs at the first sight. You are
too wise, too pure, too lofty, too far-sighted for them. And therefore
you must get power to compel them. Julian, after all, found it necessary
to compel--if he had lived seven years more he would have found it
necessary to persecute.’

‘The gods forbid that--that such a necessity should ever arise here.’

‘The only way to avoid it, believe me, is to allure and to indulge.
After all, it is for their good.’

‘True,’ sighed Hypatia. ‘Have your way, sir.’

‘Believe me, you shall have yours in turn. I ask you to be ruled by
me now, only that you may be in a position to rule me and Africa
hereafter.’

‘And such an Africa! Well, if they are born low and earthly, they must,
I suppose, he treated as such; and the fault of such a necessity is
Nature’s, and not ours.--Yet it is most degrading!--But still, if the
only method by which the philosophic few can assume their rights, as
the divinely-appointed rulers of the world, is by indulging those lower
beings whom they govern for their good--why, be it so. It is no worse
necessity than many another which the servant of the gods must endure in
days like these.’

‘Ah,’ said Orestes, refusing to hear the sigh, or to see the bitterness
of the lip which accompanied the speech--‘now Hypatia is herself again;
and my counsellor, and giver of deep and celestial reasons for all
things at which poor I can only snatch and guess by vulpine cunning. So
now for our lighter entertainment. What shall it be?’

‘What you will, provided it be not, as most such are, unfit for the eyes
of modest women. I have no skill in catering for folly.’

‘A pantomime, then? We may make that as grand and as significant as we
will, and expend too on it all our treasures in the way of gewgaws and
wild beasts.’

‘As you like.’

‘Just consider, too, what a scope for mythologic learning a pantomime
affords. Why not have a triumph of some deity? Could I commit myself
more boldly to the service of the gods! Now--who shall it be?’

‘Pallas--unless, as I suppose, she is too modest and too sober for your
Alexandrians?’

‘Yes--it does not seem to me that she would be appreciated--at all
events for the present. Why not try Aphrodite? Christians as well as
Pagans will thoroughly understand her; and I know no one who would not
degrade the virgin goddess by representing her, except a certain lady,
who has already, I hope, consented to sit in that very character, by the
side of her too much honoured slave; and one Pallas is enough at a time
in any theatre.’

Hypatia shuddered. He took it all for granted, then--and claimed her
conditional promise to the uttermost. Was there no escape? She longed to
spring up and rush away, into the streets, into the desert--anything to
break the hideous net which she had wound around herself. And yet--was
it not the cause of the gods--the one object of her life? And after
all, if he the hateful was to be her emperor, she at least was to be
an empress; and do what she would--and half in irony, and half in the
attempt to hurl herself perforce into that which she knew that she must
go through, and forget misery in activity, she answered as cheerfully as
she could.

‘Then, my goddess, thou must wait the pleasure of these base ones! At
least the young Apollo will have charms even for them.’

‘Ah, but who will represent him? This puny generation does not produce
such figures as Pylades and Bathyllus--except among those Goths.
Besides, Apollo must have golden hair; and our Greek race has intermixed
itself so shamefully with these Egyptians, that our stage-troop is as
dark as Andromeda, and we should have to apply again to those accursed
Goths, who have nearly’ (with a bow) ‘all the beauty, and nearly all the
money and the power, and will, I suspect, have the rest of it before
I am safe out of this wicked world, because they have not nearly, but
quite, all the courage. Now--Shall we ask a Goth to dance Apollo? for we
can get no one else.’

Hypatia smiled in spite of herself at the notion. ‘That would be too
shameful! I must forego the god of light himself, if I am to see him in
the person of a clumsy barbarian.’

‘Then why not try my despised and rejected Aphrodite? Suppose we had her
triumph, finishing with a dance of Venus Anadyomene. Surely that is a
graceful myth enough.’

‘As a myth; but on the stage in reality?’

‘Not worse than what this Christian city has been looking at for many a
year. We shall not run any danger of corrupting morality, be sure.’

Hypatia blushed.

‘Then you must not ask for my help.’

‘Or for your presence at the spectacle? For that be sure is a necessary
point. You are too great a person, my dearest madam, in the eyes of
these good folks to be allowed to absent yourself on such an occasion.
If my little stratagem succeeds, it will be half owing to the fact of
the people knowing that in crowning me, they crown Hypatia.... Come
now--do you not see that as you must needs be present at their harmless
scrap of mythology, taken from the authentic and undoubted histories
of those very gods whose worship we intend to restore, you will consult
your own comfort most in agreeing to it cheerfully, and in lending
me your wisdom towards arranging it? Just conceive now, a triumph of
Aphrodite, entering preceded by wild beasts led in chains by Cupids, the
white elephant and all--what a field for the plastic art! You might have
a thousand groupings, dispersions, regroupings, in as perfect bas-relief
style as those of any Sophoclean drama. Allow me only to take this paper
and pen--’

And he began sketching rapidly group after group.

‘Not so ugly, surely?’

‘They are very beautiful, I cannot deny,’ said poor Hypatia.

‘Ah, sweetest Empress! you forget sometimes that I, too, world-worm as
I am, am a Greek, with as intense a love of the beautiful as even you
yourself have. Do not fancy that every violation of correct taste does
not torture me as keenly as it does you. Some day, I hope, you will have
learned to pity and to excuse the wretched compromise between that which
ought to be and that which can be, in which we hapless statesmen must
struggle on, half-stunted, and wholly misunderstood--Ah, well! Look,
now, at these fauns and dryads among the shrubs upon the stage, pausing
in startled wonder at the first blast of music which proclaims the exit
of the goddess from her temple.’

‘The temple? Why, where are you going to exhibit?’

‘In the Theatre, of course. Where else pantomimes?’

‘But will the spectators have time to move all the way from the
Amphitheatre after that--those--’

‘The Amphitheatre? We shall exhibit the Libyans, too, in the Theatre.’

‘Combats in the Theatre sacred to Dionusos?’

‘My dear lady’--penitently--‘I know it is an offence against all the
laws of the drama.’

‘Oh, worse than that! Consider what an impiety toward the god, to
desecrate his altar with bloodshed?’

‘Fairest devotee, recollect that, after all, I may fairly borrow
Dionusos’s altar in this my extreme need; for I saved its very existence
for him, by preventing the magistrates from filling up the whole
orchestra with benches for the patricians, after the barbarous
Roman fashion. And besides, what possible sort of representation, or
misrepresentation, has not been exhibited in every theatre of the empire
for the last four hundred years? Have we not had tumblers, conjurers,
allegories, martyrdoms, marriages, elephants on the tight-rope, learned
horses, and learned asses too, if we may trust Apuleius of Madaura; with
a good many other spectacles of which we must not speak in the
presence of a vestal? It is an age of execrable taste, and we must act
accordingly.’

‘Ah!’ answered Hypatia; ‘the first step in the downward career of the
drama began when the successors of Alexander dared to profane theatres
which had re-echoed the choruses of Sophocles and Euripides by degrading
the altar of Dionusos into a stage for pantomimes!’

‘Which your pure mind must, doubtless, consider not so very much better
than a little fighting. But, after all, the Ptolemies could not do
otherwise. You can only have Sophoclean dramas in a Sophoclean age; and
theirs was no more of one than ours is, and so the drama died a natural
death; and when that happens to man or thing, you may weep over it if
you will, but you must, after all, bury it, and get something else in
its place--except, of course, the worship of the gods.’

‘I am glad that you except that, at least,’ said Hypatia, somewhat
bitterly. ‘But why not use the Amphitheatre for both spectacles?’

‘What can I do? I am over head and ears in debt already; and the
Amphitheatre is half in ruins, thanks to that fanatic edict of the late
emperor’s against gladiators. There is no time or money for repairing
it; and besides, how pitiful a poor hundred of combatants will look in
an arena built to hold two thousand! Consider, my dearest lady, in what
fallen times we live!’

‘I do, indeed!’ said Hypatia. ‘But I will not see the altar polluted by
blood. It is the desecration which it has undergone already which has
provoked the god to withdraw the poetic inspiration.’

‘I do not doubt the fact. Some curse from Heaven, certainly, has fallen
on our poets, to judge by their exceeding badness. Indeed, I am inclined
to attribute the insane vagaries of the water-drinking monks and nuns,
like those of the Argive women, to the same celestial anger. But I will
see that the sanctity of the altar is preserved, by confining the combat
to the stage. And as for the pantomime which will follow, if you would
only fall in with my fancy of the triumph of Aphrodite, Dionusos would
hardly refuse his altar for the glorification of his own lady-love.’

‘Ah--that myth is a late, and in my opinion a degraded one.’

‘Be it so; but recollect, that another myth makes her, and not without
reason, the mother of all living beings. Be sure that Dionusos will have
no objection, or any other god either, to allow her to make her children
feel her conquering might; for they all know well enough, that if we
can once get her well worshipped here, all Olympus will follow in her
train.’

‘That was spoken of the celestial Aphrodite, whose symbol is the
tortoise, the emblem of domestic modesty and chastity: not of that baser
Pandemic one.’

‘Then we will take care to make the people aware of whom they are
admiring by exhibiting in the triumph whole legions of tortoises: and
you yourself shall write the chant, while I will see that the chorus is
worthy of what it has to sing. No mere squeaking double flute and a pair
of boys: but a whole army of cyclops and graces, with such trebles and
such bass-voices! It shall make Cyril’s ears tingle in his palace!’

‘The chant! A noble office for me, truly! That is the very part of the
absurd spectacle to which you used to say the people never dreamed of
attending. All which is worth settling you seemed to have settled for
yourself before you deigned to consult me.’

‘I said so? Surely you must mistake. But if any hired poetaster’s chant
do pass unheeded, what has that to do with Hypatia’s eloquence and
science, glowing with the treble inspiration of Athene, Phoebus, and
Dionusos? And as for having arranged beforehand--my adorable mistress,
what more delicate compliment could I have paid you?’

‘I cannot say that it seems to me to be one.’

‘How? After saving you every trouble which I could, and racking my
overburdened wits for stage effects and properties, have I not brought
hither the darling children of my own brain, and laid them down
ruthlessly, for life or death, before the judgment-seat of your lofty
and unsparing criticism?’

Hypatia felt herself tricked: but there was no escape now.

‘And who, pray, is to disgrace herself and me, as Venus Anadyomene?’

‘Ah! that is the most exquisite article in all my bill of fare! What if
the kind gods have enabled me to exact a promise from--whom, think you?’

‘What care I? How can I tell?’ asked Hypatia, who suspected and dreaded
that she could tell.

‘Pelagia herself!’

Hypatia rose angrily.

‘This, sir, at least, is too much! It was not enough for you, it seems,
to claim, or rather to take for granted, so imperiously, so mercilessly,
a conditional promise--weakly, weakly made, in the vain hope that you
would help forward aspirations of mine which you have let lie fallow for
months--in which I do not believe that you sympathise now!--It was not
enough for you to declare yourself publicly yesterday a Christian, and
to come hither this morning to flatter me into the belief that you will
dare, ten days hence, to restore the worship of the gods whom you have
abjured!--It was not enough to plan without me all those movements in
which you told me I was to be your fellow-counsellor--the very condition
which you yourself offered!--It was not enough for you to command me to
sit in that theatre, as your bait, your puppet, your victim, blushing
and shuddering at sights unfit for the eyes of gods and men:--but, over
and above all this, I must assist in the renewed triumph of a woman who
has laughed down my teaching, seduced away my scholars, braved me in
my very lecture-room--who for four years has done more than even Cyril
himself to destroy all the virtue and truth which I have toiled to
sow--and toiled in vain! Oh, beloved gods! where will end the tortures
through which your martyr must witness for you to a fallen race?’

And, in spite of all her pride, and of Orestes’s presence, her eyes
filled with scalding tears.

Orestes’s eyes had sunk before the vehemence of her just passion; but as
she added the last sentence in a softer and sadder tone, he raised them
again, with a look of sorrow and entreaty as his heart whispered--

‘Fool!--fanatic! But she is too beautiful! Win her I must and will!’

‘Ah! dearest, noblest Hypatia! What have I done? Unthinking fool that I
was! In the wish to save you trouble--In the hope that I could show you,
by the aptness of my own plans, that my practical statesmanship was not
altogether an unworthy helpmate for your loftier wisdom--wretch that I
am, I have offended you; and I have ruined the cause of those very gods
for whom, I swear, I am as ready to sacrifice myself as ever you can
be!’

The last sentence had the effect which it was meant to have.

‘Ruined the cause of the gods?’ asked she, in a startled tone.

‘Is it not ruined without your help? And what am I to understand from
your words but that--hapless man that I am!--you leave me and them
henceforth to our own unassisted strength?’

‘The unassisted strength of the gods is omnipotence.’

‘Be it so. But--why is Cyril, and not Hypatia, master of the masses
of Alexandria this day? Why but because he and his have fought,
and suffered, and died too, many a hundred of them, for their god,
omnipotent as they believe him to be? Why are the old gods forgotten; my
fairest logician?--for forgotten they are.’

Hypatia trembled from head to foot, and Orestes went on more blandly
than ever.

‘I will not ask an answer to that question of mine. All I entreat is
forgiveness for--what for I know not: but I have sinned, and that is
enough for me. What if I have been too confident--too hasty? Are you
not the price for which I strain? And will not the preciousness of the
victor’s wreath excuse some impatience in the struggle for it? Hypatia
has forgotten who and what the gods have made her--she has not even
consulted her own mirror, when she blames one of her innumerable adorers
for a forwardness which ought to be rather imputed to him as a virtue.’

And Orestes stole meekly such a glance of adoration, that Hypatia
blushed, and turned her face away.... After all, she was woman. And she
was a fanatic.... And she was to be an empress.... And Orestes’s voice
was as melodious, and his manner as graceful as ever charmed the heart
of woman.

‘But Pelagia?’ she said, at last, recovering herself.

‘Would that I had never seen the creature! But, after all, I really
fancied that in doing what I have done I should gratify you.’

‘Me?’

‘Surely if revenge be sweet, as they say, it could hardly find a more
delicate satisfaction than in degradation of one who--’

‘Revenge, sir? Do you dream that I am capable of so base a passion?’

‘I? Pallas forbid!’ said Orestes, finding himself on the wrong path
again. ‘But recollect that the allowing this spectacle to take place
might rid you for ever of an unpleasant--I will not say rival.’

‘How, then?’

‘Will not her reappearance on the stage, after all her proud professions
of contempt for it, do something towards reducing her in the eyes of
this scandalous little town to her true and native level? She will
hardly dare thenceforth to go about parading herself as the consort of
a god-descended hero, or thrusting herself unbidden into Hypatia’s
presence, as if she were the daughter of a consul.’

‘But I cannot--I cannot allow it even to her. After all, Orestes, she
is a woman. And can I, philosopher as I am, help to degrade her even one
step lower than she lies already?’

Hypatia had all but said ‘a woman even as I am’: but Neo-Platonic
philosophy taught her better; and she checked the hasty assertion of
anything like a common sex or common humanity between two beings so
antipodal.

‘Ah’ rejoined Orestes, ‘that unlucky word degrade! Unthinking that I
was, to use it, forgetting that she herself will be no more degraded in
her own eyes, or any one’s else, by hearing again the plaudits of those
“dear Macedonians,” on whose breath she has lived for years, than a
peacock when he displays his train. Unbounded vanity and self-conceit
are not unpleasant passions, after all, for their victim. After all, she
is what she is, and her being so is no fault of yours. Oh, it must be!
indeed it must!’

Poor Hypatia! The bait was too delicate, the tempter too wily; and yet
she was ashamed to speak aloud the philosophic dogma which flashed a ray
of comfort and resignation through her mind, and reminded her that after
all there was no harm in allowing lower natures to develop themselves
freely in that direction which Nature had appointed for them, and in
which only they could fulfil the laws of their being, as necessary
varieties in the manifold whole of the universe. So she cut the
interview short with--

‘If it must be, then.... I will now retire, and write the ode. Only, I
refuse to have any communication whatsoever with--I am ashamed of even
mentioning her name. I will send the ode to you, and she must adapt her
dance to it as best she can. By her taste, or fancy rather, I will not
be ruled.’

‘And I,’ said Orestes, with a profusion of thanks, ‘will retire to rack
my faculties over the “dispositions.” On this day week we exhibit--and
conquer! Farewell, queen of wisdom! Your philosophy never shows to
better advantage than when you thus wisely and gracefully subordinate
that which is beautiful in itself to that which is beautiful relatively
and practically.’

He departed; and Hypatia, half dreading her own thoughts, sat down at
once to labour at the ode. Certainly it was a magnificent subject. What
etymologies, cosmogonies, allegories, myths, symbolisms, between all
heaven and earth, might she not introduce--if she could but banish that
figure of Pelagia dancing to it all, which would not be banished, but
hovered, like a spectre, in the background of all her imaginations. She
became quite angry, first with Pelagia, then with herself, for being
weak enough to think of her. Was it not positive defilement of her mind
to be haunted by the image of so defiled a being? She would purify her
thoughts by prayer and meditation. But to whom of all the gods should
she address herself? To her chosen favourite, Athene? She who had
promised to be present at that spectacle? Oh, how weak she had been to
yield! And yet she had been snared into it. Snared--there was no doubt
of it--by the very man whom she had fancied that she could guide and
mould to her own purposes. He had guided and moulded her now against her
self-respect, her compassion, her innate sense of right. Already she
was his tool. True, she had submitted to be so for a great purpose. But
suppose she had to submit again hereafter--always henceforth? And what
made the thought more poignant was, her knowledge that he was right;
that he knew what to do, and how to do it. She could not help admiring
him for his address, his quickness, his clear practical insight: and yet
she despised, mistrusted, all but hated him. But what if his were the
very qualities which were destined to succeed? What if her purer and
loftier aims, her resolutions--now, alas! broken--never to act but on
the deepest and holiest principles and by the most sacred means, were
destined never to exert themselves in practice, except conjointly with
miserable stratagems and cajoleries such as these? What if statecrafts
and not philosophy and religion, were the appointed rulers of mankind?
Hideous thought! And yet--she who had all her life tried to be
self-dependent, originative, to face and crush the hostile mob of
circumstance and custom, and do battle single-handed with Christianity
and a fallen age--how was it that in her first important and critical
opportunity of action she had been dumb, irresolute, passive, the
victim, at last, of the very corruption which she was to exterminate?
She did not know yet that those who have no other means for regenerating
a corrupted time than dogmatic pedantries concerning the dead and
unreturning past, must end, in practice, by borrowing insincerely, and
using clumsily, the very weapons of that novel age which they deprecate,
and ‘sewing new cloth into old garments,’ till the rent become patent
and incurable. But in the meanwhile, such meditations as these drove
from her mind for that day both Athene, and the ode, and philosophy, and
all things but--Pelagia the wanton.

In the meanwhile, Alexandrian politics flowed onward in their usual pure
and quiet course. The public buildings were placarded with the news of
Heraclian’s victory; and groups of loungers expressed, loudly enough,
their utter indifference as to who might rule at Rome--or even at
Byzantium. Let Heraclian or Honorius be emperor, the capitals must be
fed; and while the Alexandrian wheat-trade was uninjured, what matter
who received the tribute? Certainly, as some friends of Orestes found
means to suggest, it might not be a bad thing for Egypt, if she could
keep the tribute in her own treasury, instead of sending it to Rome
without any adequate return, save the presence of an expensive army....
Alexandria had been once the metropolis of an independent empire....
Why not again? Then came enormous largesses of corn, proving, more
satisfactorily to the mob than to the shipowners, that Egyptian wheat
was better employed at home than abroad. Nay, there were even rumours of
a general amnesty for all prisoners; and as, of course, every evil-doer
had a kind of friend, who considered him an injured martyr, all parties
were well content, on their own accounts at least, with such a move.

And so Orestes’s bubble swelled, and grew, and glittered every day with
fresh prismatic radiance; while Hypatia sat at home, with a heavy heart,
writing her ode to Venus Urania, and submitting to Orestes’s daily
visits.

One cloud, indeed, not without squalls of wind and rain, disfigured
that sky which the Prefect had invested with such serenity by the simple
expedient, well known to politicians, of painting it bright blue, since
it would not assume that colour of its own accord. For, a day or two
after Ammonius’s execution, the Prefect’s guards informed him that
the corpse of the crucified man, with the cross on which it hung, had
vanished. The Nitrian monks had come down in a body, and carried them
off before the very eyes of the sentinels. Orestes knew well enough that
the fellows must have been bribed to allow the theft; but he dare not
say so to men on whose good humour his very life might depend; so,
stomaching the affront as best he could, he vowed fresh vengeance
against Cyril, and went on his way. But, behold!--within four-and-twenty
hours of the theft, a procession of all the rascality, followed by
all the piety, of Alexandria,--monks from Nitria counted by the
thousand,--priests, deacons, archdeacons, Cyril himself, in full
pontificals, and borne aloft in the midst, upon a splendid bier, the
missing corpse, its nail-pierced hands and feet left uncovered for the
pitying gaze of the Church.

Under the very palace windows, from which Orestes found it expedient to
retire for the time being, out upon the quays, and up the steps of the
Caesareum, defiled that new portent; and in another half-hour a servant
entered, breathlessly, to inform the shepherd of people that his
victim was lying in state in the centre of the nave, a martyr duly
canonised--Ammonius now no more, but henceforth Thaumasius the
wonderful, on whose heroic virtues and more heroic faithfulness unto the
death, Cyril was already descanting from the pulpit, amid thunders of
applause at every allusion to Sisera at the brook Kishon, Sennacherib in
the house of Nisroch, and the rest of the princes of this world who come
to nought.

Here was a storm! To order a cohort to enter the church and bring away
the body was easy enough: to make them do it, in the face of certain
death, not so easy. Besides, it was too early yet for so desperate a
move as would be involved in the violation of a church .... So Orestes
added this fresh item to the long column of accounts which he intended
to settle with the patriarch; cursed for half an hour in the name of all
divinities, saints, and martyrs, Christian and Pagan; and wrote off a
lamentable history of his wrongs and sufferings to the very Byzantine
court against which he was about to rebel, in the comfortable
assurance that Cyril had sent, by the same post, a counter-statement,
contradicting it in every particular.... Never mind.... In case he
failed in rebelling, it was as well to be able to prove his allegiance
up to the latest possible date; and the more completely the two
statements contradicted each other, the longer it would take to sift
the truth out of them; and thus so much time was gained, and so much the
more chance, meantime, of a new leaf being turned over in that Sibylline
oracle of politicians--the Chapter of Accidents. And for the time being,
he would make a pathetic appeal to respectability and moderation in
general, of which Alexandria, wherein some hundred thousand tradesmen
and merchants had property to lose, possessed a goodly share.

Respectability responded promptly to the appeal; and loyal addresses and
deputations of condolence flowed in from every quarter, expressing the
extreme sorrow with which the citizens had beheld the late disturbances
of civil order, and the contempt which had been so unfortunately evinced
for the constituted authorities: but taking, nevertheless, the liberty
to remark, that while the extreme danger to property which might ensue
from the further exasperation of certain classes, prevented their taking
those active steps on the side of tranquillity to which their feelings
inclined them, the known piety and wisdom of their esteemed patriarch
made it presumptuous in them to offer any opinion on his present
conduct, beyond the expression of their firm belief that he had been
unfortunately misinformed as to those sentiments of affection and
respect which his excellency the Prefect was well known to entertain
towards him. They ventured, therefore, to express a humble hope that,
by some mutual compromise, to define which would be an unwarrantable
intrusion on their part, a happy reconciliation would be effected, and
the stability of law, property, and the Catholic Faith ensured. All
which Orestes heard with blandest smiles, while his heart was black
with curses; and Cyril answered by a very violent though a very true and
practical harangue on the text, ‘How hardly shall they that have riches
enter into the kingdom of heaven.’

So respectability and moderation met with their usual hapless fate,
and, soundly cursed by both parties, in the vain attempt to please both,
wisely left the upper powers to settle their own affairs, and went home
to their desks and counters, and did a very brisk business all that week
on the strength of the approaching festival. One hapless innkeeper only
tried to carry out in practice the principles which the deputation from
his guild had so eloquently advocated; and being convicted of giving
away bread in the morning to the Nitrian monks, and wine in the evening
to the Prefect’s guards, had his tavern gutted, and his head broken by
a joint plebiscitum of both the parties whom he had conciliated, who
afterwards fought a little together, and then, luckily for the general
peace, mutually ran away from each other.

Cyril in the meanwhile, though he was doing a foolish thing, was doing
it wisely enough. Orestes might curse, and respectability might deplore,
those nightly sermons, which shook the mighty arcades of the Caesareum,
but they could not answer them. Cyril was right and knew that he was
right. Orestes was a scoundrel, hateful to God, and to the enemies of
God. The middle classes were lukewarm covetous cowards: the whole system
of government was a swindle and an injustice; all men’s hearts were mad
with crying, ‘Lord, how long?’ The fierce bishop had only to thunder
forth text on text, from every book of scripture, old and new, in order
to array on his side not merely the common sense and right feeling, but
the bigotry and ferocity of the masses.

In vain did the good Arsenius represent to him not only the scandal but
the unrighteousness of his new canonisation. ‘I must have fuel, my good
father,’ was his answer, ‘wherewith to keep alight the flame of zeal. If
I am to be silent as to Heraclian’s defeat, I must give them some other
irritant, which will put them in a proper temper to act on that defeat,
when they are told of it. If they hate Orestes, does he not deserve it?
Even if he is not altogether as much in the wrong in this particular
case as they fancy he is, are there not a thousand other crimes of
his which deserve their abhorrence even more? At all events, he must
proclaim the empire, as you yourself say, or we shall have no handle
against him. He will not dare to proclaim it if he knows that we are
aware of the truth. And if we are to keep the truth in reserve, we must
have something else to serve meanwhile as a substitute for it.’

And poor Arsenius submitted with a sigh, as he saw Cyril making a fresh
step in that alluring path of evil-doing that good might come, which led
him in after years into many a fearful sin, and left his name disgraced,
perhaps for ever, in the judgment of generations, who know as little
of the pandemonium against which he fought, as they do of the intense
belief which sustained him in his warfare; and who have therefore
neither understanding nor pardon for the occasional outrages and errors
of a man no worse, even if no better, than themselves.



CHAPTER XXI: THE SQUIRE-BISHOP


In a small and ill-furnished upper room of a fortified country house,
sat Synesius, the Bishop of Cyrene.

A goblet of wine stood beside him, on the table, but it was untasted.
Slowly and sadly, by the light of a tiny lamp, he went on writing a
verse or two, and then burying his face in his hand, while hot tears
dropped between his fingers on the paper; till a servant entering,
announced Raphael Aben-Ezra.

Synesius rose, with a gesture of surprise, and hurried towards the door.
‘No, ask him to come hither to me. To pass through those deserted rooms
at night is more than I can bear.’ And he waited for his guest at the
chamber door, and as he entered, caught both his hands in his, and tried
to speak; but his voice was choked within him.

‘Do not speak,’ said Raphael gently, leading him to his chair again. ‘I
know all.’

‘You know all? And are you, then, so unlike the rest of the world,
that you alone have come to visit the bereaved and the deserted in his
misery?’

‘I am like the rest of the world, after all; for I came to you on my own
selfish errand, to seek comfort. Would that I could give it instead! But
the servants told me all, below.’

‘And yet you persisted in seeing me, as if I could help you? Alas! I can
help no one now. Here I am at last, utterly alone, utterly helpless. As
I came from my mother’s womb, so shall I return again. My last child--my
last and fairest--gone after the rest!--Thank God, that I have had even
a day’s peace wherein to lay him by his mother and his brothers; though
He alone knows how long the beloved graves may remain unrifled. Let
it have been shame enough to sit here in my lonely tower and watch the
ashes of my Spartan ancestors, the sons of Hercules himself, my glory
and my pride, sinful fool that I was! cast to the winds by barbarian
plunderers.... When wilt thou make an end, O Lord, and slay me?’

‘And how did the poor boy die?’ asked Raphael, in hope of soothing
sorrow by enticing it to vent itself in words.

‘The pestilence.--What other fate can we expect, who breathe an air
tainted with corpses, and sit under a sky darkened with carrion birds?
But I could endure even that, if I could work, if I could help. But to
sit here, imprisoned now for months between these hateful towers; night
after night to watch the sky, red with burning homesteads; day after day
to have my ears ring with the shrieks of the dying and the captives--for
they have begun now to murder every male down to the baby at the
breast--and to feel myself utterly fettered, impotent, sitting here like
some palsied idiot, waiting for my end! I long to rush out, and fall
fighting, sword in hand: but I am their last, their only hope.
The governors care nothing for our supplications. In vain have I
memorialised Gennadius and Innocent, with what little eloquence my
misery has not stunned in me. But there is no resolution, no unanimity
left in the land. The soldiery are scattered in small garrisons,
employed entirely in protecting the private property of their officers.
The Ausurians defeat them piecemeal, and, armed with their spoils,
actually have begun to beleaguer fortified towns; and now there is
nothing left for us, but to pray that, like Ulysses, we may be devoured
the last. What am I doing? I am selfishly pouring out my own sorrows,
instead of listening to yours.’

‘Nay, friend, you are talking of the sorrows of your country, not of
your own. As for me, I have no sorrow--only a despair: which, being
irremediable, may well wait. But you--oh, you must not stay here. Why
not escape to Alexandria?’

‘I will die at my post as I have lived, the father of my people. When
the last ruin comes, and Cyrene itself is besieged, I shall return
thither from my present outpost, and the conquerors shall find the
bishop in his place before the altar. There I have offered for years the
unbloody sacrifice to Him, who will perhaps require of me a bloody one,
that so the sight of an altar polluted by the murder of His priest,
may end the sum of Pentapolitan woe, and arouse Him to avenge His
slaughtered sheep! There, we will talk no more of it. This, at least, I
have left in my power, to make you welcome. And after supper you shall
tell me what brings you hither.’

And the good bishop, calling his servant, set to work to show his guest
such hospitality as the invaders had left in his power.

Raphael’s usual insight had not deserted him when, in his utter
perplexity, he went, almost instinctively, straight to Synesius. The
Bishop of Cyrene, to judge from the charming private letters which he
has left, was one of those many-sided, volatile, restless men, who
taste joy and sorrow, if not deeply or permanently, yet abundantly and
passionately. He lived, as Raphael had told Orestes, in a whirlwind of
good deeds, meddling and toiling for the mere pleasure of action; and as
soon as there was nothing to be done, which, till lately, had happened
seldom enough with him, paid the penalty for past excitement in fits of
melancholy. A man of magniloquent and flowery style, not without a vein
of self-conceit; yet withal of overflowing kindliness, racy humour,
and unflinching courage, both physical and moral; with a very clear
practical faculty, and a very muddy speculative one--though, of course,
like the rest of the world, he was especially proud of his own weakest
side, and professed the most passionate affection for philosophic
meditation; while his detractors hinted, not without a show of reason,
that he was far more of an adept in soldiering and dog-breaking than in
the mysteries of the unseen world.

To him Raphael betook himself, he hardly knew why; certainly not for
philosophic consolation; perhaps because Synesius was, as Raphael used
to say, the only Christian from whom he had ever heard a hearty laugh;
perhaps because he had some wayward hope, unconfessed even to himself,
that he might meet at Synesius’s house the very companions from whom
he had just fled. He was fluttering round Victoria’s new and strange
brilliance like a moth round the candle, as he confessed, after supper,
to his host; and now he was come hither, on the chance of being able to
singe his wings once more.

Not that his confession was extracted without much trouble to the good
old man, who, seeing at once that Raphael had some weight upon his mind,
which he longed to tell, and yet was either too suspicious or too
proud to tell, set himself to ferret out the secret, and forgot all his
sorrows for the time, as soon as he found a human being to whom he might
do good. But Raphael was inexplicably wayward and unlike himself. All
his smooth and shallow persiflage, even his shrewd satiric humour,
had vanished. He seemed parched by some inward fever; restless,
moody, abrupt, even peevish; and Synesius’s curiosity rose with his
disappointment, as Raphael went on obstinately declining to consult the
very physician before whom he presented himself as patient.

‘And what can you do for me, if I did tell you?’

‘Then allow me, my very dear friend, to ask this. As you deny having
visited me on my own account, on what account did you visit me?’

‘Can you ask? To enjoy the society of the most finished gentleman of
Pentapolis.’

‘And was that worth a week’s journey in perpetual danger of death?’

‘As for danger of death, that weighs little with a man who is careless
of life. And as for the week’s journey, I had a dream one night, on my
way, which made me question whether I were wise in troubling a Christian
bishop with any thoughts or questions which relate merely to poor human
beings like myself, who marry and are given in marriage.’

‘You forget, friend, that you are speaking to one who has married, and
loved--and lost.’

‘I did not. But you see how rude I am growing. I am no fit company for
you, or any man. I believe I shall end by turning robber-chief, and
heading a party of Ausurians.’

‘But,’ said the patient Synesius ‘you have forgotten your dream all this
while.

‘Forgotten!--I did not promise to tell it you--did I?’

‘No; but as it seems to have contained some sort of accusation against
my capacity, do you not think it but fair to tell the accused what it
was?’

Raphael smiled.

‘Well then.... Suppose I had dreamt this. That a philosopher, an
academic, and a believer in nothing and in no man, had met at Berenice
certain rabbis of the Jews, and heard them reading and expounding a
certain book of Solomon--the Song of Songs. You, as a learned man, know
into what sort of trumpery allegory they would contrive to twist it; how
the bride’s eyes were to mean the scribes who were full of wisdom, as
the pools of Heshbon were of water; and her stature spreading like a
palm-tree, the priests who spread out their hands when blessing the
people; and the left hand which should be under her head, the Tephilim
which these old pedants wore on their left wrists; and the right hand
which should hold her, the Mezuzah which they fixed on the right side of
their doors to keep off devils; and so forth.’

‘I have heard such silly Cabbalisms, certainly.’

‘You have? Then suppose that I went on, and saw in my dream how this
same academic and unbeliever, being himself also a Hebrew of the
Hebrews, snatched the roll out of the rabbis’ hands, and told them that
they were a party of fools for trying to set forth what the book might
possibly mean, before they had found out what it really did mean; and
that they could only find out that by looking honestly at the plain
words to see what Solomon meant by it. And then, suppose that this same
apostate Jew, this member of the synagogue of Satan, in his carnal and
lawless imaginations, had waxed eloquent with the eloquence of devils,
and told them that the book set forth, to those who had eyes to see,
how Solomon the great king, with his threescore queens, and fourscore
concubines, and virgins without number, forgets all his seraglio and his
luxury in pure and noble love for the undefiled, who is but one; and
how as his eyes are opened to see that God made the one man for the one
woman, and the one woman to the one man, even as it was in the garden of
Eden, so all his heart and thoughts become pure, and gentle, and simple;
how the song of the birds, and the scent of the grapes, and the spicy
southern gales, and all the simple country pleasures of the glens of
Lebanon, which he shares with his own vine-dressers and slaves, become
more precious in his eyes than all his palaces and artificial pomp; and
the man feels that he is in harmony, for the first time in his life,
with the universe of God, and with the mystery of the seasons; that
within him, as well as without him, the winter is past, and the rain
is over and gone; the flowers appear on the earth, and the voice of the
turtle is heard in the land.... And suppose I saw in my dream how the
rabbis, when they heard those wicked words, stopped their ears with one
accord, and ran upon that son of Belial and cast him out, because
he blasphemed their sacred books by his carnal interpretations. And
suppose--I only say suppose--that I saw in my dream how the poor man
said in his heart, “I will go to the Christians; they acknowledge the
sacredness of this same book; and they say that their God taught them
that ‘in the beginning God made man, male and female.’ Perhaps they will
tell me whether this Song of Songs does not, as it seems to me to do,
show the passage upwards from brutal polygamy to that monogamy which
they so solemnly command, and agree with me, that it is because the
song preaches this that it has a right to take its place among the holy
writings? You, as a Christian bishop, should know what answer such a man
would receive.... You are silent? Then I will tell you what answer
he seemed to receive in my dream. “O blasphemous and carnal man, who
pervertest Holy Scripture into a cloak for thine own licentiousness, as
if it spoke of man’s base and sensual affections, know that this book is
to be spiritually interpreted of the marriage between the soul and its
Creator, and that it is from this very book that the Catholic Church
derives her strongest arguments in favour of holy virginity, and the
glories of a celibate life.”’

Synesius was still silent.

‘And what do you think I saw in my dream that that man did when he found
these Christians enforcing, as a necessary article of practice, as well
as of faith, a baseless and bombastic metaphor, borrowed from that very
Neo-Platonism out of which he had just fled for his life? He cursed the
day he was born, and the hour in which his father was told, “Thou hast
gotten a man-child,” and said, “Philosophers, Jews, and Christians,
farewell for ever and a day! The clearest words of your most sacred
books mean anything or nothing’ as the case may suit your fancies; and
there is neither truth nor reason under the sun. What better is there
for a man, than to follow the example of his people, and to turn usurer,
and money-getter, and cajoler of fools in his turn, even as his father
was before him?”’

Synesius remained a while in deep thought, and at last-- ‘And yet you
came to me?’

‘I did, because you have loved and married; because you have stood out
manfully against this strange modern insanity, and refused to give up,
when you were made a bishop, the wife whom God had given you. You, I
thought, could solve the riddle for me, if any man could.’

‘Alas, friend! I have begun to distrust, of late, my power of solving
riddles. After all, why should they be solved? What matters one more
mystery in a world of mysteries? “If thou marry, thou hast not sinned,”
 are St. Paul’s own words; and let them be enough for us. Do not ask me
to argue with you, but to help you. Instead of puzzling me with deep
questions, and tempting me to set up my private judgment, as I have
done too often already, against the opinion of the Church, tell me your
story, and test my sympathy rather than my intellect. I shall feel with
you and work for you, doubt not, even though I am unable to explain to
myself why I do it.’

‘Then you cannot solve my riddle?’

‘Let me help you,’ said Synesius with a sweet smile, ‘to solve it for
yourself. You need not try to deceive me. You have a love, an undefiled,
who is but one. When you possess her, you will be able to judge better
whether your interpretation of the Song is the true one; and if you
still think that it is, Synesius, at least, will have no quarrel against
you. He has always claimed for himself the right of philosophising in
private, and he will allow the same liberty to you’ whether the mob do
or not.’

‘Then you agree with me? Of course you do!’

‘Is it fair to ask me whether I accept a novel interpretation, which
I have only heard five minutes ago, delivered in a somewhat hasty and
rhetorical form?’

‘You are shirking the question,’ said Raphael peevishly.

‘And what if I am? Tell me, point-blank, most self-tormenting of
men, can I help you in practice, even though I choose to leave you to
yourself in speculation?’

‘Well, then, if you will have my story, take it, and judge for yourself
of Christian common sense.’

And hurriedly, as if ashamed of his own confession, and yet compelled,
in spite of himself, to unbosom it, he told Synesius all, from his first
meeting with Victoria to his escape from her at Berenice.

The good bishop, to Aben-Ezra’s surprise, seemed to treat the whole
matter as infinitely amusing. He chuckled, smote his hand on his
thigh, and nodded approval at every pause--perhaps to give the speaker
courage--perhaps because he really thought that Raphael’s prospects were
considerably less desperate than he fancied....

‘If you laugh at me, Synesius, I am silent. It is quite enough to endure
the humiliation of telling you that I am--confound it!--like any boy of
sixteen.’

‘Laugh at you?--with you, you mean. A convent? Pooh, pooh! The old
Prefect has enough sense, I will warrant him, not to refuse a good match
for his child.’

‘You forget that I have not the honour of being a Christian.’

‘Then we’ll make you one. You won’t let me convert you, I know; you
always used to gibe and jeer at my philosophy. But Augustine comes
to-morrow.

‘Augustine?’

‘He does indeed; and we must be off by daybreak, with all the armed men
we can muster, to meet and escort him, and to hunt, of course, going and
coming; for we have had no food this fortnight, but what our own dogs
and bows have furnished us. He shall take you in hand, and cure you of
all your Judaism in a week; and then just leave the rest to me; I will
manage it somehow or other. It is sure to come right. No; do not be
bashful. It will be real amusement to a poor wretch who can find nothing
else to do--Heigho! And as for lying under an obligation to me, why
we can square that by your lending me three or four thousand gold
pieces--Heaven knows I want them!--on the certainty of never seeing them
again.’

Raphael could not help laughing in his turn.

‘Synesius is himself still, I see, and not unworthy of his ancestor
Hercules; and though he shrinks from cleansing the Augean stable of my
soul, paws like the war-horse in the valley at the hope of undertaking
any lesser labours in my behalf. But, my dear generous bishop, this
matter is more serious, and I, the subject of it, have become more
serious also, than you fancy. Consider: by the uncorrupt honour of your
Spartan forefathers, Agis, Brasidas, and the rest of them, don’t you
think that you are, in your hasty kindness, tempting me to behave in a
way which they would have called somewhat rascally?’

‘How then, my dear man! You have a very honourable and praiseworthy
desire; and I am willing to help you to compass it.’

‘Do you think that I have not cast about before now for more than one
method of compassing it for myself? My good man, I have been tempted a
dozen times already to turn Christian: but there has risen up in me the
strangest fancy about conscience and honour.... I never was scrupulous
before, Heaven knows--I am not over-scrupulous now--except about her.
I cannot dissemble before her. I dare not look in her face when I had
a lie in my right hand.... She looks through one-into one-like a
clear-eyed awful goddess.... I never was ashamed in my life till my eyes
met hers....’

‘But if you really became a Christian?’

‘I cannot. I should suspect my own motives. Here is another of these
absurd soul-anatomising scruples which have risen up in me. I should
suspect that I had changed my creed because I wished to change it--that
if I was not deceiving her I was deceiving myself. If I had not loved
her it might have been different: but now--just because I do love her,
I will not, I dare not, listen to Augustine’s arguments, or my own
thoughts on the matter.’

‘Most wayward of men!’ cried Synesius, half peevishly; ‘you seem to take
some perverse pleasure in throwing yourself into the waves again, the
instant you have climbed a rock of refuge!’

‘Pleasure? Is there any pleasure in feeling oneself at death-grips with
the devil? I bad given up believing in him for many a year .... And
behold, the moment that I awaken to anything noble and right, I find the
old serpent alive and strong at my throat! No wonder that I suspect
him, you, myself--I, who have been tempted, every hour in the last week,
temptations to become a devil. Ay,’ he went on, raising his voice, as
all the fire of his intense Eastern nature flashed from his black eyes,
‘to be a devil! From my childhood till now never have I known what it
was to desire and not to possess. It is not often that I have had to
trouble any poor Naboth for his vineyard: but when I have taken a fancy
to it, Naboth has always found it wiser to give way. And now.... Do you
fancy that I have not had a dozen hellish plots flashing across me in
the last week? Look here! This is the mortgage of her father’s whole
estate. I bought it--whether by the instigation of Satan or of God--of
a banker in Berenice, the very day I left them; and now they, and every
straw which they possess, are in my power. I can ruin them--sell them as
slaves--betray them to death as rebels--and last, but not least, cannot
I hire a dozen worthy men to carry her off, and cut the Gordian knot
most simply and summarily? And yet I dare not. I must be pure to
approach the pure; and righteous, to kiss the feet of the righteous.
Whence came this new conscience to me I know not, but come it has; and
I dare no more do a base thing toward her, than I dare toward a God,
if there be one. This very mortgage--I hate it, curse it, now that I
possess it--the tempting devil!’

‘Burn it,’ said Synesius quietly.

‘Perhaps I may. At least, used it never shall be. Compel her? I am too
proud, or too honourable, or something or other, even to solicit her.
She must come to me; tell me with her own lips that she loves me, that
she will take me, and make me worthy of her. She must have mercy on me,
of her own free will, or--let her pine and die in that accursed prison;
and then a scratch with the trusty old dagger for her father, and
another for myself, will save him from any more superstitions, and me
from any more philosophic doubts, for a few aeons of ages, till we start
again in new lives--he, I suppose, as a jackass, and I as a baboon. What
matter? but unless I possess her by fair means, God do so to me, and
more also, if I attempt base ones!’

‘God be with you, my son, in the noble warfare!’ said Synesius, his eyes
filling with kindly tears.

‘It is no noble warfare at all. It is a base coward fear, in one who
never before feared man or devil, and is now fallen low enough to be
afraid of a helpless girl!’

‘Not so,’ cried Synesius, in his turn; ‘it is a noble and a holy fear.
You fear her goodness. Could you see her goodness, much less fear it,
were there not a Divine Light within you which showed you what, and how
awful, goodness was? Tell me no more, Raphael Aben-Ezra, that you do not
fear God; for he who fears Virtue, fears Him whose likeness Virtue is.
Go on--go on.... Be brave, and His strength will be made manifest in
your weakness.’ ...............

It was late that night before Synesius compelled his guest to retire,
after having warned him not to disturb himself if he heard the
alarm-bell ring, as the house was well garrisoned, and having set the
water-clock by which he and his servants measured their respective
watches. And then the good bishop, having disposed his sentinels, took
his station on the top of his tower, close by the warning-bell; and as
he looked out over the broad lands of his forefathers, and prayed that
their desolation might come to an end at last, he did not forget to
pray for the desolation of the guest who slept below, a happier and more
healthy slumber than he had known for many a week. For before Raphael
lay down that night, he had torn to shreds Majoricus’s mortgage,
and felt a lighter and a better man as he saw the cunning temptation
consuming scrap by scrap in the lamp-flame. And then, wearied out with
fatigue of body and mind, he forgot Synesius, Victoria, and the rest,
and seemed to himself to wander all night among the vine-clad glens
of Lebanon, amid the gardens of lilies, and the beds of spices; while
shepherds’ music lured him on and on, and girlish voices, chanting the
mystic idyll of his mighty ancestor, rang soft and fitful through his
weary brain. ...............

Before sunrise the next morning, Raphael was faring forth gallantly,
well armed and mounted, by Synesius’s side, followed by four or five
brace of tall brush-tailed greyhounds, and by the faithful Bran,
whose lop-ears and heavy jaws, unique in that land of prick-ears and
fox-noses, formed the absorbing subject of conversation among some
twenty smart retainers, who, armed to the teeth for chase and war, rode
behind the bishop on half-starved, raw-boned horses, inured by desert
training and bad times to do the maximum of work upon the minimum of
food.

For the first few miles they rode in silence, through ruined villages
and desolated farms, from which here and there a single inhabitant
peeped forth fearfully, to pour his tale of woe into the ears of the
hapless bishop, and then, instead of asking alms from him, to entreat
his acceptance of some paltry remnant of grain or poultry, which had
escaped the hands of the marauders; and as they clung to his hands, and
blessed him as their only hope and stay, poor Synesius heard patiently
again and again the same purposeless tale of woe, and mingled his tears
with theirs, and then spurred his horse on impatiently, as if to escape
from the sight of misery which he could not relieve; while a voice in
Raphael’s heart seemed to ask him--‘Why was thy wealth given to thee,
but that thou mightest dry, if but for a day, such tears as these?’

And he fell into a meditation which was not without its fruit in due
season, but which lasted till they had left the enclosed country, and
were climbing the slopes of the low rolling hills, over which lay the
road from the distant sea. But as they left the signs of war behind
them, the volatile temper of the good bishop began to rise. He petted
his hounds, chatted to his men, discoursed on the most probable quarter
for finding game, and exhorted them cheerfully enough to play the man,
as their chance of having anything to eat at night depended entirely on
their prowess during the day.

‘Ah!’ said Raphael at last, glad of a pretext for breaking his own chain
of painful thought, ‘there is a vein of your land-salt. I suspect
that you were all at the bottom of the sea once, and that the old
Earth-shaker Neptune, tired of your bad ways, gave you a lift one
morning, and set you up as dry land, in order to be rid of you.’

‘It may really be so. They say that the Argonauts returned back through
this country from the Southern Ocean, which must have been therefore far
nearer us than it is now, and that they carried their mystic vessel over
these very hills to the Syrtis. However, we have forgotten all about
the sea thoroughly enough since that time. I well remember my first
astonishment at the side of a galley in Alexandria, and the roar of
laughter with which my fellow-students greeted my not unreasonable
remark, that it looked very like a centipede.’

‘And do you recollect, too, the argument which I had once with your
steward about the pickled fish which I brought you from Egypt; and the
way in which, when the jar was opened, the servants shrieked and
ran right and left, declaring that the fish-bones were the spines of
poisonous serpents?’

‘The old fellow is as obstinate as ever, I assure you, in his disbelief
in salt water. He torments me continually by asking me to tell him the
story of my shipwreck, and does not believe me after all, though he has
heard it a dozen times. “Sir,” he said to me solemnly, after you were
gone, “will that strange gentleman pretend to persuade me that anything
eatable can come out of his great pond there at Alexandria, when every
one can see that the best fountain in the country never breeds anything
but frogs and leeches?”’

As he spoke they left the last field behind them, and entered upon a
vast sheet of breezy down, speckled with shrubs and copse, and split
here and there by rocky glens ending in fertile valleys once thick with
farms and homesteads.

‘Here,’ cried Synesius, ‘are our hunting-grounds. And now for one hour’s
forgetfulness, and the joys of the noble art. What could old Homer have
been thinking of when he forgot to number it among the pursuits which
are glorious to heroes, and make man illustrious, and yet could laud in
those very words the forum?’

‘The forum?’ said Raphael. ‘I never saw it yet make men anything but
rascals.’

‘Brazen-faced rascals, my friend. I detest the whole breed of lawyers,
and never meet one without turning him into ridicule; effeminate
pettifoggers, who shudder at the very sight of roast venison, when they
think of the dangers by which it has been procured. But it is a cowardly
age, my friend--a cowardly age. Let us forget it, and ourselves.’

‘And even philosophy and Hypatia?’ said Raphael archly.

‘I have done with philosophy. To fight like a Heracleid, and to die like
a bishop, is all I have left--except Hypatia, the perfect, the wise! I
tell you, friend, it is a comfort to me, even in my deepest misery, to
recollect that the corrupt world yet holds one being so divine--’

And he was running on in one of his high-flown laudations of his idol,
when Raphael checked him.

‘I fear our common sympathy on that subject is rather weakened. I have
begun to doubt her lately nearly as much as I doubt philosophy.’

‘Not her virtue?

‘No, friend; nor her beauty, nor her wisdom; simply her power of making
me a better man. A selfish criterion, you will say. Be it so.... What a
noble horse that is of yours!’

‘He has been--he has been; but worn out now, like his master and his
master’s fortunes....’

‘Not so, certainly, the colt on which you have done me the honour to
mount me.’

‘Ah, my poor boy’s pet!.... You are the first person who has crossed him
since--’

‘Is he of your own breeding?’ asked Raphael, trying to turn the
conversation.

‘A cross between that white Nisaean which you sent me, and one of my own
mares.’

‘Not a bad cross; though he keeps a little of the bull head and
greyhound flank of your Africans.’

‘So much the better, friend. Give me bone--bone and endurance for this
rough down country. Your delicate Nisaeans are all very well for a few
minutes over those flat sands of Egypt: but here you need a horse who
will go forty miles a day over rough and smooth, and dine thankfully off
thistles at night. Aha, poor little man!’--as a jerboa sprang up from
a tuft of bushes at his feet--‘I fear you must help to fill our
soup-kettle in these hard times.’

And with a dexterous sweep of his long whip, the worthy bishop entangled
the jerboas long legs, whisked him up to his saddle-bow, and delivered
him to the groom and the game-bag.

‘Kill him at once. Don’t let him squeak, boy!--he cries too like a
child....’

‘Poor little wretch!’ said Raphael. ‘What more right, now, have we to
eat him than he to eat us?’

‘Eh? If he can eat us, let him try. How long have you joined the
Manichees?’

‘Have no fears on that score. But, as I told you, since my wonderful
conversion by Bran, the dog, I have begun to hold dumb animals in
respect, as probably quite as good as myself.’

‘Then you need a further conversion, friend Raphael, and to learn what
is the dignity of man; and when that arrives, you will learn to believe,
with me, that the life of every beast upon the face of the earth would
be a cheap price to pay in exchange for the life of the meanest human
being.’

‘Yes, if they be required for food: but really, to kill them for our
amusement!’

‘Friend, when I was still a heathen, I recollect well how I used to
haggle at that story of the cursing of the fig-tree; but when I learnt
to know what man was, and that I had been all my life mistaking for a
part of nature that race which was originally, and can be again, made
in the likeness of God, then I began to see that it were well if every
fig-tree upon earth were cursed, if the spirit of one man could be
taught thereby a single lesson. And so I speak of these, my darling
field-sports, on which I have not been ashamed, as you know, to write a
book.’

‘And a very charming one: yet you were still a pagan, recollect, when
you wrote it.’

‘I was; and then I followed the chase by mere nature and inclination.
But now I know I have a right to follow it, because it gives me
endurance, promptness, courage, self-control, as well as health and
cheerfulness: and therefore--Ah! a fresh ostrich-track!’

And stopping short, Synesius began pricking slowly up the hillside.

‘Back!’ whispered he, at last. ‘Quietly and silently. Lie down on your
horse’s neck, as I do, or the long-necked rogues may see you. They must
be close to us over the brow. I know that favourite grassy slope of old.
Round under yon hill, or they will get wind of us, and then farewell to
them!’

And Synesius and his groom cantered on, hanging each to their horses’
necks by an arm and a leg, in a way which Raphael endeavoured in vain to
imitate.

Two or three minutes more of breathless silence brought them to the
edge of the hill, where Synesius halted, peered down a moment, and then
turned to Raphael, his face and limbs quivering with delight, as he held
up two fingers, to denote the number of the birds.

‘Out of arrow-range! Slip the dogs, Syphax!’

And in another minute Raphael found himself galloping headlong down the
hill, while two magnificent ostriches, their outspread plumes waving in
the bright breeze, their necks stooped almost to the ground, and their
long legs flashing out behind them, were sweeping away before the
greyhounds at a pace which no mortal horse could have held for ten
minutes.

‘Baby that I am still!’ cried Synesius, tears of excitement glittering
in his eyes;.... while Raphael gave himself up to the joy, and forgot
even Victoria, in the breathless rush over rock and bush, sandhill and
watercourse.

‘Take care of that dry torrent-bed! Hold up, old horse! This will
not last two minutes more. They cannot hold their pace against this
breeze.... Well tried, good dog, though you did miss him! Ah, that my
boy were here! There--they double. Spread right and left, my children,
and ride at them as they pass!’

And the ostriches, unable, as Synesius said, to keep their pace against
the breeze, turned sharp on their pursuers, and beating the air with
outspread wings, came down the wind again, at a rate even more wonderful
than before.

‘Ride at him, Raphael--ride at him, and turn him into those bushes!’
cried Synesius, fitting an arrow to his bow.

Raphael obeyed, and the bird swerved into the low scrub; the
well-trained horse leapt at him like a cat; and Raphael, who dare not
trust his skill in archery, struck with his whip at the long neck as it
struggled past him, and felled the noble quarry to the ground. He was
in the act of springing down to secure his prize, when a shout from
Synesius stopped him.

‘Are you mad? He will kick out your heart! Let the dogs hold him!’

‘Where is the other?’ asked Raphael, panting.

‘Where he ought to be. I have not missed a running shot for many a
month.’

‘Really, you rival the Emperor Commodus himself.’

‘Ah! I tried his fancy of crescent-headed arrows once, and decapitated
an ostrich or two tolerably: but they are only fit for the amphitheatre:
they will not lie safely in the quiver on horseback, I find. But what
is that?’ And he pointed to a cloud of white dust, about a mile down the
valley. ‘A herd of antelopes? If so, God is indeed gracious to us! Come
down--whatsoever they are, we have no time to lose.’

And collecting his scattered forces, Synesius pushed on rapidly towards
the object which had attracted his attention.

‘Antelopes!’ cried one.

‘Wild horses!’ cried another.

‘Tame ones, rather!’ cried Synesius, with a gesture of wrath. ‘I saw the
flash of arms!’

‘The Ausurians!’ And a yell of rage rang from the whole troop.

‘Will you follow me, children?’

‘To death!’ shouted they.

‘I know it. Oh that I had seven hundred of you, as Abraham had! We would
see then whether these scoundrels did not share, within a week, the fate
of Chedorlaomer’s.’

‘Happy man, who can actually trust your own slaves!’ said Raphael, as
the party galloped on, tightening their girdles and getting ready their
weapons.

‘Slaves? If the law gives me the power of selling one or two of them who
are not yet wise enough to be trusted to take care of themselves, it
is a fact which both I and they have long forgotten. Their fathers grew
gray at my father’s table, and God grant that they may grow gray at
mine! We eat together, work together, hunt together, fight together,
jest together, and weep together. God help us all! for we have but one
common weal. Now--do you make out the enemy, boys?’

‘Ausurians, your Holiness. The same party who tried Myrsinitis last
week. I know them by the helmets which they took from the Markmen.’

‘And with whom are they fighting?’

No one could see. Fighting they certainly were: but their victims were
beyond them, and the party galloped on.

‘That was a smart business at Myrsinitis. The Ausurians appeared while
the people were at morning prayers. The soldiers, of course, ran for
their lives, and hid in the caverns, leaving the matter to the priests.’

‘If they were of your presbytery, I doubt not they proved themselves
worthy of their diocesan.’

‘Ah, if all my priests were but like them! or my people either!’ said
Synesius, chatting quietly in full gallop, like a true son of the
saddle. ‘They offered up prayers for victory, sallied out at the head
of the peasants, and met the Moors in a narrow pass. There their hearts
failed them a little. Faustus, the deacon, makes them a speech; charges
the leader of the robbers, like young David, with a stone, beats his
brains out therewith, strips him in true Homeric fashion, and routs the
Ausurians with their leader’s sword; returns and erects a trophy in due
classic form, and saves the whole valley.’

‘You should make him archdeacon.’

‘I would send him and his townsfolk round the province, if I could,
crowned with laurel, and proclaim before them at every market-place,
“These are men of God.” With whom can those Ausurians be dealing?
Peasants would have been all killed long ago, and soldiers would have
run away long ago. It is truly a portent in this country to see a fight
last ten minutes. Who can they be? I see them now, and hewing away
like men too. They are all on foot but two; and we have not a cohort of
infantry left for many a mile round.’

‘I know who they are!’ cried Raphael, suddenly striking spurs into his
horse. ‘I will swear to that armour among a thousand. And there is a
litter in the midst of them. On! and fight, men, if you ever fought in
your lives!’

‘Softly!’ cried Synesius. ‘Trust an old soldier, and perhaps--alas! that
he should have to say it--the best left in this wretched country. Round
by the hollow, and take the barbarians suddenly in flank. They will not
see us then till we are within twenty paces of them. Aha! you have a
thing or two to learn yet, Aben-Ezra.’

And chuckling at the prospect of action, the gallant bishop wheeled his
little troop and in five minutes more dashed out of the copse with a
shout and a flight of arrows, and rushed into the thickest of the fight.

One cavalry skirmish must be very like another. A crash of horses, a
flashing of sword-blades, five minutes of blind confusion, and
then those who have not been knocked out of their saddles by their
neighbours’ knees, and have not cut off their own horses’ heads instead
of their enemies’, find themselves, they know not how, either running
away or being run away from--not one blow in ten having taken effect on
either side. And even so Raphael, having made vain attempts to cut
down several Moors, found himself standing on his head in an altogether
undignified posture, among innumerable horses’ legs, in all possible
frantic motions. To avoid one was to get in the way of another; so he
philosophically sat still, speculating on the sensation of having his
brains kicked out, till the cloud of legs vanished, and he found himself
kneeling abjectly opposite the nose of a mule, on whose back sat,
utterly unmoved, a tall and reverend man, in episcopal costume. The
stranger, instead of bursting out laughing, as Raphael did, solemnly
lifted his hand, and gave him his blessing. The Jew sprang to his feet,
heedless of all such courtesies, and, looking round, saw the Ausurians
galloping off up the hill in scattered groups, and Synesius standing
close by him, wiping a bloody sword.

‘Is the litter safe’?’ were his first words.

‘Safe; and so are all. I gave you up for killed when I saw you run
through with that lance.

‘Run through? I am as sound in the hide as a crocodile, said Raphael,
laughing.

‘Probably the fellow took the butt instead of the point, in his hurry.
So goes a cavalry scuffle. I saw you hit three or four fellows running
with the flat of your sword.’

Ah, that explains,’ said Raphael, why, I thought myself once the best
swordsman on the Armenian frontier....’

‘I suspect that you were thinking of some one besides the Moors,’ said
Synesius, archly pointing to the litter; and Raphael, for the first
time for many a year, blushed like a boy of fifteen, and then turned
haughtily away, and remounted his horse, saying, ‘Clumsy fool that I
was!’

‘Thank God rather that you have been kept from the shedding of blood,’
said the stranger bishop, in a soft, deliberate voice, with a peculiarly
clear and delicate enunciation. ‘If God have given us the victory, why
grudge His having spared any other of His creatures besides ourselves?’

‘Because there are so many the more of them left to ravish, burn, and
slay,’ answered Synesius. ‘Nevertheless, I am not going to argue with
Augustine.’

Augustine! Raphael looked intently at the man, a tall, delicate-featured
personage, with a lofty and narrow forehead, scarred like his cheeks
with the deep furrows of many a doubt and woe. Resolve, gentle but
unbending, was expressed in his thin close-set lips and his clear quiet
eye; but the calm of his mighty countenance was the calm of a worn-out
volcano, over which centuries must pass before the earthquake-rents be
filled with kindly soil, and the cinder-slopes grow gay with grass and
flowers. The Jew’s thoughts, however, were soon turned into another
channel by the hearty embraces of Majoricus and his son.

‘We have caught you again, you truant!’ said the young Tribune; ‘you
could not escape us, you see, after all.’

‘Rather,’ said the father, ‘we owe him a second debt of gratitude for a
second deliverance. We were right hard bested when you rode up.’

‘Oh, he brings nothing but good with him whenever he appears; and then
he pretends to be a bird of ill-omen,’ said the light-hearted Tribune,
putting his armour to rights.

Raphael was in his secret heart not sorry to find that his old friends
bore him no grudge for his caprice; but all he answered was-- ‘Pray
thank any one but me; I have, as usual, proved myself a fool. But
what brings you here, like Gods e Machina? It is contrary to all
probabilities. One would not admit so astounding an incident, even in
the modern drama.’

‘Contrary to none whatsoever, my friend. We found Augustine at Berenice,
in act to set off to Synesius: we--one of us, that is--were certain that
you would be found with him; and we decided on acting as Augustine’s
guard, for none of the dastard garrison dare stir out.’

‘One of us,’ thought Raphael,--‘which one?’ And, conquering his pride,
he asked, as carelessly as he could, for Victoria.

‘She is there in the litter, poor child!’ said her father in a serious
tone.

‘Surely not ill?’

‘Alas! either the overwrought excitement of months of heroism broke down
when she found us safe at last’ or some stroke from God--.... Who can
tell what I may not have deserved?--But she has been utterly prostrate
in body and mind, ever since we parted from you at Berenice.’

The blunt soldier little guessed the meaning of his own words. But
Raphael, as he heard, felt a pang shoot through his heart, too keen for
him to discern whether it sprang from joy or from despair.

‘Come,’ cried the cheerful voice of Synesius, ‘come, Aben-Ezra; you have
knelt for Augustine’s blessing already, and now you must enter into the
fruition of it. Come, you two philosophers must know each other. Most
holy, I entreat you to preach to this friend of mine, at once the wisest
and the foolishest of men.’

‘Only the latter,’ said Raphael; ‘but open to any speech of Augustine’s,
at least when we are safe home, and game enough for Synesius’s new
guests killed.’

And turning away, he rode silent and sullen by the side of his
companions, who began at once to consult together as to the plans of
Majoricus and his soldiers.

In spite of himself, Raphael soon became interested in Augustine’s
conversation. He entered into the subject of Cyrenian misrule and ruin
as heartily and shrewdly as any man of the world; and when all the
rest were at a loss, the prompt practical hint which cleared up the
difficulty was certain to come from him. It was by his advice that
Majoricus had brought his soldiery hither; it was his proposal that they
should be employed for a fixed period in defending these remote southern
boundaries of the province; he checked the impetuosity of Synesius,
cheered the despair of Majoricus, appealed to the honour and the
Christianity of the soldiers, and seemed to have a word--and that the
right word--for every man; and after a while, Aben-Ezra quite forgot
the stiffness and deliberation of his manner, and the quaint use of
Scripture texts in far-fetched illustrations of every opinion which he
propounded. It had seemed at first a mere affectation; but the arguments
which it was employed to enforce were in themselves so moderate and so
rational that Raphael began to feel, little by little, that his apparent
pedantry was only the result of a wish to refer every matter, even the
most vulgar, to some deep and divine rule of right and wrong.

‘But you forget all this while, my friends,’ said Majoricus at last,
‘the danger which you incur by sheltering proclaimed rebels.’

‘The King of kings has forgiven your rebellion, in that while He has
punished you by the loss of your lands and honours, He has given you
your life for a prey in this city of refuge. It remains for you to bring
forth worthy fruits of penitence; of which I know none better than those
which John the Baptist commanded to the soldiery of old, “Do no violence
to any man, and be content with your wages.”’

‘As for rebels and rebellion,’ said Synesius, ‘they are matters
unknown among as; for where there is no king there can be no rebellion.
Whosoever will help us against Ausurians is loyal in our eyes. And as
for our political creed, it is simple enough--namely, that the emperor
never dies, and that his name is Agamemnon, who fought at Troy; which
any of my grooms will prove to you syllogistically enough to satisfy
Augustine himself. As thus--

‘Agamemnon was the greatest and the best of kings.

‘The emperor is the greatest and the best of kings.

‘Therefore, Agamemnon is the emperor, and conversely.’

‘It had been well,’ said Augustine, with a grave smile, ‘if some of our
friends had held the same doctrine, even at the expense of their logic.’

‘Or if,’ answered Synesius, ‘they believed with us, that the emperor’s
chamberlain is a clever old man, with a bald head like my own, Ulysses
by name, who was rewarded with the prefecture of all lands north of the
Mediterranean, for putting out the Cyclop’s eye two years ago. However,
enough of this. But you see, you are not in any extreme danger of
informers and intriguers.... The real difficulty is, how you will be
able to obey Augustine, by being content with your wages. For,’ lowering
his voice, ‘you will get literally none.’

‘It will be as much as we deserve,’ said the young Tribune: ‘but my
fellows have a trick of eating--’

‘They are welcome, then, to all deer and ostriches which they can
catch. But I am not only penniless, but reduced myself to live, like the
Laestrygons, on meat and nothing else; all crops and stocks for miles
round being either burnt or carried off.’

‘E nihilo nihil!’ said Augustine, having nothing else to say. But here
Raphael woke up on a sudden with--

‘Did the Pentapolitan wheat-ships go to Rome?’

‘No; Orestes stopped them when he stopped the Alexandrian convoy.’

‘Then the Jews have the wheat, trust them for it; and what they have
I have. There are certain moneys of mine lying at interest in the
seaports, which will set that matter to rights for a month or two. Do
you find an escort to-morrow, and I will find wheat.’

‘But; most generous of friends, I can neither repay you interest nor
principal.’

‘Be it so. I have spent so much money during the last thirty years in
doing nothing but evil, that it is hard if I may not at last spend a
little in doing good.--Unless his Holiness of Hippo thinks it wrong for
you to accept the goodwill of an infidel?’

‘Which of these three,’ said Augustine, ‘was neighbour to him who fell
among thieves, but he who had mercy on him? Verily, my friend Raphael
Aben-Ezra, thou art not far from the kingdom of God.’

‘Of which God?’ asked Raphael slyly.

‘Of the God of thy forefather Abraham, whom thou shalt hear us worship
this evening, if He will. Synesius, have you a church wherein I can
perform the evening service, and give a word of exhortation to these my
children?’

Synesius sighed. ‘There is a ruin, which was last month a church.’

‘And is one still. Man did not place there the presence of God, and man
cannot expel it.’

And so, sending out hunting-parties right and left in chase of
everything which had animal life, and picking up before nightfall a
tolerably abundant supply of game, they went homewards, where Victoria
was entrusted to the care of Synesius’s old stewardess, and the soldiery
were marched straight into the church; while Synesius’s servants, to
whom the Latin service would have been unintelligible, busied themselves
in cooking the still warm game.

Strangely enough it sounded to Raphael that evening to hear, among those
smoke-grimed pillars and fallen rafters, the grand old Hebrew psalms of
his nation ring aloft, to the very chants, too, which were said by the
rabbi to have been used in the Temple-worship of Jerusalem.... They, and
the invocations, thanksgivings, blessings, the very outward ceremonial
itself, were all Hebraic, redolent of the thoughts, the words of his
own ancestors. That lesson from the book of Proverbs, which Augustine’s
deacon was reading in Latin--the blood of the man who wrote these words
was flowing in Aben-Ezra’s veins.... Was it a mistake, an hypocrisy? or
were they indeed worshipping, as they fancied, the Ancient One who spoke
face to face with his forefathers, the Archetype of man, the friend of
Abraham and of Israel?

And now the sermon began; and as Augustine stood for a moment in prayer
in front of the ruined altar, every furrow in his worn face lit up by
a ray of moonlight which streamed in through the broken roof,
Raphael waited impatiently for his speech. What would he, the refined
dialectician, the ancient teacher of heathen rhetoric, the courtly and
learned student, the ascetic celibate and theosopher, have to say
to those coarse war-worn soldiers, Thracians and Markmen, Gauls and
Belgians, who sat watching there, with those sad earnest faces? What one
thought or feeling in common could there be between Augustine and his
congregation?

At last, after signing himself with the cross, he began. The subject was
one of the psalms which had just been read--a battle psalm, concerning
Moab and Amalek, and the old border wars of Palestine. What would he
make of that?

He seemed to start lamely enough, in spite of the exquisite grace of his
voice, and manner, and language, and the epigrammatic terseness of
every sentence. He spent some minutes over the inscription of the
psalm--allegorised it--made it mean something which it never did mean in
the writer’s mind, and which it, as Raphael well knew, never could mean,
for his interpretation was founded on a sheer mis-translation. He punned
on the Latin version--derived the meaning of Hebrew words from Latin
etymologies.... And as he went on with the psalm itself, the common
sense of David seemed to evaporate in mysticism. The most fantastic and
far-fetched illustrations, drawn from the commonest objects, alternated
with mysterious theosophic dogma. Where was that learning for which he
was so famed? Where was that reverence for the old Hebrew Scriptures
which he professed? He was treating David as ill as Hypatia used to
treat Homer--worse even than old Philo did, when in the home life of
the old Patriarchs, and in the mighty acts of Moses and Joshua, he could
find nothing but spiritual allegories wherewith to pamper the private
experiences of the secluded theosophist. And Raphael felt very much
inclined to get up and go away, and still more inclined to say, with a
smile, in his haste, ‘All men are liars.’....

And yet, what an illustration that last one was! No mere fancy, but a
real deep glance into the working of the material universe, as symbolic
of the spiritual and unseen one. And not drawn, as Hypatia’s were,
exclusively from some sublime or portentous phenomenon, but from
some dog, or kettle, or fishwife, with a homely insight worthy of old
Socrates himself. How personal he was becoming, too!... No long bursts
of declamation, but dramatic dialogue and interrogation, by-hints,
and unexpected hits at one and the other most commonplace soldier’s
failing.... And yet each pithy rebuke was put in a universal,
comprehensive form, which made Raphael himself wince--which might, he
thought, have made any man, or woman either, wince in like manner. Well,
whether or not Augustine knew truths for all men, he at least knew
sins for all men, and for himself as well as his hearers. There was
no denying that. He was a real man, right or wrong. What he rebuked in
others, he had felt in himself, and fought it to the death-grip, as the
flash and quiver of that worn face proclaimed.... But yet, why were the
Edomites, by an utterly mistaken pun on their name, to signify one sort
of sin, and the Ammonites another, and the Amalekites another? What
had that to do with the old psalm? What had it to do with the present
auditory? Was not this the wildest and lowest form of that unreal,
subtilising, mystic pedantry, of which he had sickened long ago in
Hypatia’s lecture-room, till he fled to Bran, the dog, for honest
practical realities?

No.... Gradually, as Augustine’s hints became more practical and orated,
Raphael saw that there was in his mind most real and organic connection,
true or false, in what seemed at first mere arbitrary allegory.
Amalekites, personal sins, Ausurian robbers and ravishers, were to him
only so many different forms of one and the same evil. He who helped
any of them fought against the righteous God: he who fought against them
fought for that God; but he must conquer the Amalekites within, if
he expected to conquer the Amalekites without. Could the legionaries
permanently put down the lust and greed around them, while their own
hearts were enslaved to lust and greed within? Would they not be helping
it by example, while they pretended to crush it by sword-strokes? Was it
not a mockery, an hypocrisy? Could God’s blessing be on it? Could they
restore unity and peace to the country while there was neither unity nor
peace within them? What had produced the helplessness of the people, the
imbecility of the military, but inward helplessness, inward weakness?
They were weak against Moors, because they were weak against enemies
more deadly than Moors. How could they fight for God outwardly, while
they were fighting against him inwardly? He would not go forth with
their hosts. How could He, when He was not among their hosts? He, a
spirit, must dwell in their spirits .... And then the shout of a king
would be among them, and one of them should chase a thousand.... Or if
not--if both people and soldiers required still further chastening and
humbling--what matter, provided that they were chastened and humbled?
What matter if their faces were confounded, if they were thereby driven
to seek His Name, who alone was the Truth, the Light, and the Life? What
if they were slain? Let them have conquered the inward enemies, what
matter to them if the outward enemies seemed to prevail for a moment?
They should be recompensed at the resurrection of the just, when death
was swallowed up in victory. It would be seen then who had really
conquered in the eyes of the just God--they, God’s ministers,
the defenders of peace and justice, or the Ausurians, the enemies
thereof.... And then, by some quaintest turn of fancy, he introduced a
word of pity and hope, even for the wild Moorish robbers. It might be
good for them to have succeeded thus far; they might learn from their
Christian captives, purified by affliction, truths which those captives
had forgotten in prosperity. And, again, it might be good for them, as
well as for Christians, to be confounded and made like chaff before the
wind, that so they too might learn His Name....And so on, through and
in spite of all conceits, allegories, overstrained interpretations,
Augustine went on evolving from the Psalms, and from the past, and from
the future, the assertion of a Living, Present God, the eternal enemy of
discord, injustice, and evil, the eternal helper and deliverer of those
who were enslaved and crushed thereby in soul or body.... It was all
most strange to Raphael.... Strange in its utter unlikeness to any
teaching, Platonist or Hebrew, which he had ever heard before, and
stranger still in its agreement with those teachings; in the instinctive
ease with which it seemed to unite and justify them all by the talisman
of some one idea--and what that might be, his Jewish prejudices could
not prevent his seeing, and yet would not allow him to acknowledge. But,
howsoever he might redden with Hebrew pride; howsoever he might long
to persuade himself that Augustine was building up a sound and right
practical structure on the foundation of a sheer lie; he could not help
watching, at first with envy, and then with honest pleasure, the
faces of the rough soldiers, as they gradually lightened up into fixed
attention, into cheerful and solemn resolve.

‘What wonder?’ said Raphael to himself, ‘what wonder, after all? He has
been speaking to these wild beasts as to sages and saints; he has
been telling them that God is as much with them as with prophets and
psalmists.... I wonder if Hypatia, with all her beauty, could have
touched their hearts as he has done?’

And when Raphael rose at the end of this strange discourse, he felt more
like an old Hebrew than he had done since he sat upon his nurse’s
knee, and heard legends about Solomon and the Queen of Sheba. What
if Augustine were right after all? What if the Jehovah of the old
Scriptures were not merely the national patron of the children of
Abraham, as the Rabbis held; not merely, as Philo held, the Divine
Wisdom which inspired a few elect sages, even among the heathen; but the
Lord of the whole earth, and of the nations thereof?--And suddenly,
for the first time in his life, passages from the psalms and prophets
flashed across him, which seemed to assert this. What else did that
whole book of Daniel and the history of Nebuchadnezzar mean--if not
that? Philosophic latitudinarianism had long ago cured him of the
Rabbinical notion of the Babylonian conqueror as an incarnate fiend,
devoted to Tophet, like Sennacherib before him. He had long in private
admired the man, as a magnificent human character, a fairer one, in his
eyes, than either Alexander or Julius Caesar.... What if Augustine had
given him a hint which might justify his admiration?.... But more.
.... What if Augustine were right in going even further than Philo and
Hypatia? What if this same Jehovah, Wisdom, Logos, call Him what they
might, were actually the God of the spirits, as well as of the bodies
of all flesh? What if he was as near--Augustine said that He was--to the
hearts of those wild Markmen, Gauls, Thracians, as to Augustine’s
own heart? What if He were--Augustine said He was--yearning after,
enlightening, leading home to Himself, the souls of the poorest, the
most brutal, the most sinful?--What if He loved man as man, and not
merely one favoured race or one favoured class of minds?.... And in the
light of that hypothesis, that strange story of the Cross of Calvary
seemed not so impossible after all.... But then, celibacy and
asceticism, utterly non-human as they were, what had they to do with the
theory of a human God?

And filled with many questionings, Raphael was not sorry to have the
matter brought to an issue that very evening in Synesius’s sitting-room.
Majoricus, in his blunt, soldierlike way, set Raphael and Augustine at
each other without circumlocution; and Raphael, after trying to smile
and pooh-pooh away the subject, was tempted to make a jest on a seeming
fallacious conceit of Augustine’s--found it more difficult than he
thought to trip up the serious and wary logician, lost his temper a
little--a sign, perhaps, of returning health in a sceptic--and
soon found himself fighting desperately, with Synesius backing him,
apparently for the mere pleasure of seeing a battle, and Majoricus
making him more and more cross by the implicit dogmatic faith with which
he hewed at one Gordian knot after another, till Augustine had to save
himself from his friends by tripping the good Prefect gently up, and
leaving him miles behind the disputants, who argued on and on, till
broad daylight shone in, and the sight of the desolation below recalled
all parties to more material weapons, and a sterner warfare.

But little thought Raphael Aben-Ezra, as he sat there, calling up every
resource of his wit and learning, in the hope, half malicious, half
honestly cautious, of upsetting the sage of Hippo, and forgetting all
heaven and earth in the delight of battle with his peers, that in a
neighbouring chamber, her tender limbs outspread upon the floor, her
face buried in her dishevelled locks; lay Victoria, wrestling all night
long for him in prayer and bitter tears, as the murmur of busy voices
reached her eager ears, longing in vain to catch the sense of words, on
which hung now her hopes and bliss-how utterly and entirely, she lead
never yet confessed to herself, though she dare confess it to that
Son of Man to whom she prayed, as to One who felt with tenderness and
insight beyond that of a brother, a father, even of a mother, for her
maiden’s blushes and her maiden’s woes.



CHAPTER XXII: PANDEMONIUM


But where was Philammon all that week?

For the first day or two of his imprisonment he had raved like some wild
beast entrapped. His new-found purpose and energy, thus suddenly dammed
back and checked, boiled up in frantic rage. He tore at the bars of his
prison; he rolled himself, shrieking, on the floor. He called in vain on
Hypatia, on Pelagia, on Arsenius--on all but God. Pray he could not, and
dare not; for to whom was he to pray? To the stars?--to the Abysses and
the Eternities?....

Alas! as Augustine said once, bitterly enough, of his own Manichaean
teachers, Hypatia had taken away the living God, and given him instead
the four Elements.... And in utter bewilderment and hopeless terror
he implored the pity of every guard and gaoler who passed along the
corridor, and conjured them, as brothers, fathers, men, to help him.
Moved at once by his agony and by his exceeding beauty, the rough
Thracians, who knew enough of their employer’s character to have little
difficulty in believing his victim to be innocent, listened to him and
questioned him. But when they offered the very help which he implored,
and asked him to tell his story, the poor boy’s tongue clove to the roof
of his mouth. How could he publish his sisters shame? And yet she was
about to publish it herself!.... And instead of words, he met their
condolences with fresh agonies, till they gave him up as mad; and, tired
by his violence, compelled him, with blows and curses, to remain quiet;
and so the week wore out, in dull and stupefied despair, which trembled
on the very edge of idiocy. Night and day were alike to him. The food
which was thrust in through his grate remained untasted; hour after
hour, day after day, he sat upon the ground, his head buried in his
hands, half-dozing from mere exhaustion of body and mind. Why should
he care to stir, to eat, to live? He had but one purpose in heaven and
earth: and that one purpose was impossible.

At last his cell-door grated on its hinges.

‘Up, my mad youth!’ cried a rough voice. ‘Up, and thank the favour of
the gods, and the bounty of our noble--ahem!--Prefect. To-day he gives
freedom to all prisoners. And I suppose a pretty boy like you may go
about your business, as well as uglier rascals!’

Philammon looked up in the gaoler’s face with a dim half-comprehension
of his meaning.

‘Do you hear?’ cried the man with a curse. ‘You are free. Jump up, or I
shut the door again, and your one chance is over.’

‘Did she dance Venus Anadyomene?’

‘She! Who?’

‘My sister! Pelagia!’

‘Heaven only knows what she has not danced in her time! But they say she
dances to-day once more. Quick! out, or I shall not be ready in time for
the sports. They begin an hour hence. Free admission into the theatre
to-day for all--rogues and honest men, Christians and heathens--Curse
the boy! he’s as mad as ever.’

So indeed Philammon seemed; for, springing suddenly to his feet, he
rushed out past the gaoler, upsetting him into the corridor, and fled
wildly from the prison among the crowd of liberated ruffians, ran from
the prison home, from home to the baths, from the baths to the theatre,
and was soon pushing his way, regardless of etiquette, towards the lower
tiers of benches, in order, he hardly knew why, to place himself as near
as possible to the very sight which he dreaded and abhorred.

As fate would have it, the passage by which he had entered opened close
to the Prefect’s chair of state, where sat Orestes, gorgeous in his
robes of office, and by him--to Philammon’s surprise and horror--Hypatia
herself.

More beautiful than ever, her forehead sparkling, like Juno’s own, with
a lofty tiara of jewels, her white Ionic robe half hidden by a crimson
shawl, there sat the vestal, the philosopher. What did she there? But
the boy’s eager eyes, accustomed but too well to note every light and
shade of feeling which crossed that face, saw in a moment how wan
and haggard was its expression. She wore a look of constraint, of
half-terrified self-resolve, as of a martyr: and yet not an undoubting
martyr; for as Orestes turned his head at the stir of Philammon’s
intrusion, and flashing with anger at the sight, motioned him fiercely
back, Hypatia turned too, and as her eyes met her pupil’s she blushed
crimson, and started, and seemed in act to motion him back also; and
then, recollecting herself, whispered something to Orestes which quieted
his wrath, and composed herself, or rather sank into her place again, as
one who was determined to abide the worst.

A knot of gay young gentlemen, Philammon’s fellow-students, pulled him
down among them, with welcome and laughter; and before he could collect
his thoughts, the curtain in front of the stage had fallen, and the
sport began.

The scene represented a background of desert mountains, and on the stage
itself, before a group of temporary huts, stood huddling together the
black Libyan prisoners, some fifty men, women, and children, bedizened
with gaudy feathers and girdles of tasselled leather, brandishing their
spears and targets, and glaring out with white eyes on the strange scene
before them, in childish awe and wonder.

Along the front of the stage a wattled battlement had been erected,
while below, the hyposcenium had been painted to represent rocks, thus
completing the rough imitation of a village among the Libyan hills.

Amid breathless silence, a herald advanced, and proclaimed that these
were prisoners taken in arms against the Roman senate and people,
and therefore worthy of immediate death: but that the Prefect, in his
exceeding clemency toward them, and especial anxiety to afford the
greatest possible amusement to the obedient and loyal citizens of
Alexandria, had determined, instead of giving them at once to the
beasts, to allow them to fight for their lives, promising to the
survivors a free pardon if they acquitted themselves valiantly.

The poor wretches on the stage, when this proclamation was translated
to them, set up a barbaric yell of joy, and brandished their spears and
targets more fiercely than ever.

But their joy was short. The trumpets sounded the attack: a body of
gladiators, equal in number to the savages, marched out from one of
the two great side passages, made their obeisance to the applauding
spectators, and planting their scaling-ladders against the front of the
stage, mounted to the attack.

The Libyans fought like tigers; yet from the first, Hypatia, and
Philammon also, could see that their promised chance of life was a mere
mockery. Their light darts and naked limbs were no match for the heavy
swords and complete armour of their brutal assailants, who endured
carelessly a storm of blows and thrusts on heads and faces protected by
visored helmets: yet so fierce was the valour of the Libyans, that even
they recoiled twice, and twice the scaling-ladders were hurled
down again, while more than one gladiator lay below, rolling in the
death-agony.

And then burst forth the sleeping devil in the hearts of that great
brutalised multitude. Yell upon yell of savage triumph, and still more
savage disappointment, rang from every tier of that vast ring of seats,
at each blow and parry, onslaught and repulse; and Philammon saw with
horror and surprise that luxury, refinement, philosophic culture itself,
were no safeguards against the infection of bloodthirstiness. Gay and
delicate ladies, whom he had seen three days before simpering delight
at Hypatia’s heavenward aspirations, and some, too, whom he seemed to
recollect in Christian churches, sprang from their seats, waved their
hands and handkerchiefs, and clapped and shouted to the gladiators. For,
alas! there was no doubt as to which side the favour of the spectators
inclined. With taunts, jeers, applause, entreaties, the hired ruffians
were urged on to their work of blood. The poor wretches heard no voice
raised in their favour: nothing but contempt, hatred, eager lust
of blood, glared from those thousands of pitiless eyes; and,
broken-hearted, despairing, they flagged and drew back one by one.
A shout of triumph greeted the gladiators as they climbed over the
battlement, and gained a footing on the stage. The wretched blacks
broke up, and fled wildly from corner to corner, looking vainly for an
outlet....

And then began a butchery.... Some fifty men, women, and children were
cooped together in that narrow space.... And yet Hypatia’s countenance
did not falter. Why should it? What were their numbers, beside the
thousands who had perished year by year for centuries, by that and far
worse deaths, in the amphitheatres of that empire, for that faith which
she was vowed to re-establish. It was part of the great system; and she
must endure it.

Not that she did not feel; for she, too, was woman; and her heart,
raised far above the brutal excitement of the multitude, lay calmly open
to the most poignant stings of pity. Again and again she was in the
act to entreat mercy for some shrieking woman or struggling child;
but before her lips could shape the words, the blow had fallen, or the
wretch was whirled away from her sight in the dense undistinguishable
mass of slayers and slain. Yes, she had begun, and she must follow
to the end.... And, after all, what were the lives of those few
semi-brutes, returning thus a few years earlier to the clay from which
they sprang, compared with the regeneration of a world?.... And it would
be over in a few minutes more, and that black writhing heap be still for
ever, and the curtain fall .... And then for Venus Anadyomene, and art,
and joy, and peace, and the graceful wisdom and beauty of the old Greek
art, calming and civilising all hearts, and softening them into pure
devotion for the immortal myths, the immortal deities, who had inspired
their forefathers in the glorious days of old.... But still the black
heap writhed; and she looked away, up, down, and round, everywhere, to
avoid the sickening sight; and her eye caught Philammon’s gazing at her
with looks of horror and disgust.... A thrill of shame rushed through
her heart, and blushing scarlet, she sank her head, and whispered to
Orestes--


‘Have mercy!--spare the rest!’

‘Nay, fairest vestal! The mob has tasted blood, and they must have
their fill of it, or they will turn onus for aught I know. Nothing so
dangerous as to check a brute, whether he be horse, dog, or man, when
once his spirit is up. Ha! there is a fugitive! How well the little
rascal runs!’

As he spoke, a boy, the only survivor, leaped from the stage, and rushed
across the orchestra toward them, followed by a rough cur-dog.

‘You shall have this youth, if he reaches us.’

Hypatia watched breathless. The boy had just arrived at the altar in
the centre of the orchestra, when he saw a gladiator close upon him.
The ruffian’s arm was raised to strike, when, to the astonishment of the
whole theatre, boy and dog turned valiantly to bay, and leaping on
the gladiator, dragged him between them to the ground. The triumph was
momentary. The uplifted hands, the shout of ‘Spare him!’ came too late.
The man, as he lay, buried his sword in the slender body of the child,
and then rising, walked coolly back to the side passages, while the poor
cur stood over the little corpse, licking its hands and face, and making
the whole building ring with his doleful cries. The attendants entered,
and striking their hooks into corpse after corpse, dragged them out of
sight, marking their path by long red furrows in the sand; while the
dog followed, until his inauspicious howlings died away down distant
passages.

Philammon felt sick and giddy, and half rose to escape. But Pelagia!....
No--he must sit it out, and see the worst, if worse than this was
possible. He looked round. The people were coolly sipping wine and
eating cakes, while they chatted admirably about the beauty of the great
curtain, which had fallen and hidden the stage, and represented, on
a ground of deep-blue sea, Europa carried by the bull across the
Bosphorus, while Nereids and Tritons played around.

A single flute within the curtain began to send forth luscious strains,
deadened and distant, as if through far-off glens and woodlands; and
from the side passages issued three Graces, led by Peitho, the goddess
of persuasion, bearing a herald’s staff in her hand. She advanced to the
altar in the centre of the orchestra, and informed the spectators
that, during the absence of Ares in aid of a certain great military
expedition, which was shortly to decide the diadem of Rome, and the
liberty, prosperity, and supremacy of Egypt and Alexandria, Aphrodite
had returned to her lawful allegiance, and submitted for the time being
to the commands of her husband, Hephaestus; that he, as the deity of
artificers, felt a peculiar interest in the welfare of the city of
Alexandria, the workshop of the world, and had, as a sign of his
especial favour, prevailed upon his fair spouse to exhibit, for this
once, her beauties to the assembled populace, and, in the unspoken
poetry of motion, to represent to them the emotions with which, as she
arose new-born from the sea, she first surveyed that fair expanse of
heaven and earth of which she now reigned undisputed queen.

A shout of rapturous applause greeted this announcement, and forthwith
limped from the opposite slip the lame deity himself, hammer and pincers
on shoulder, followed by a train of gigantic Cyclops, who bore on their
shoulders various pieces of gilded metal work.

Hephaestus, who was intended to supply the comic element in the vast
pantomimic pageant, shambled forward with studied uncouthness, amid
roars of laughter; surveyed the altar with ludicrous contempt; raised
his mighty hammer, shivered it to pieces with a single blow, and
beckoned to his attendants to carry off the fragments, and replace it
with something more fitting for his august spouse.

With wonderful quickness the metal open-work was put in its place, and
fitted together, forming a frame of coral branches intermingled with
dolphins, Nereids, and Tritons. Four gigantic Cyclops then approached,
staggering under the weight of a circular slab of green marble, polished
to a perfect mirror, which they placed on the framework. The Graces
wreathed its circumference with garlands of sea-weed, shells, and
corallines, and the mimic sea was complete.

Peitho and the Graces retired a few steps, and grouped themselves with
the Cyclops, whose grimed and brawny limbs, and hideous one-eyed
masks, threw out in striking contrast the delicate hue and grace of the
beautiful maiden figures; while Hephaestus turned toward the curtain,
and seemed to await impatiently the forthcoming of the goddess.

Every lip was breathless with expectation as the flutes swelled louder
and nearer; horns and cymbals took up the harmony; and, to a triumphant
burst of music, the curtain rose, and a simultaneous shout of delight
burst from ten thousand voices.

The scene behind represented a magnificent temple, half hidden in an
artificial wood of tropic trees and shrubs, which filled the stage.
Fauns and Dryads peeped laughing from among their stems, and gorgeous
birds, tethered by unseen threads, fluttered and sang among their
branches. In the centre an overarching avenue of palms led from the
temple doors to the front of the stage, from which the mimic battlements
had disappeared, and had been replaced, in those few moments, by a broad
slope of smooth greensward, leading down into the orchestra, and fringed
with myrtles, roses, apple-trees, poppies, and crimson hyacinths,
stained with the life-blood of Adonis.

The folding doors of the temple opened slowly, the crash of instruments
resounded from within; and, preceded by the musicians, came forth the
triumph of Aphrodite, and passed down the slope, and down the outer ring
of the orchestra.

A splendid car, drawn by white oxen, bore the rarest and gaudiest of
foreign flowers and fruits, which young girls, dressed as Hours and
Seasons, strewed in front of the procession and among the spectators.

A long line of beautiful youths and maidens, crowned with garlands,
and robed in scarfs of purple gauze, followed by two and two. Each pair
carried or led a pair of wild animals, captives of the conquering might
of Beauty.

Foremost were borne, on the wrists of the actors, the birds especially
sacred to the goddess--doves and sparrows, wrynecks and swallows; and a
pair of gigantic Indian tortoises, each ridden by a lovely nymph, showed
that Orestes had not forgotten one wish, at least, of his intended
bride.

Then followed strange birds from India, parakeets, peacocks, pheasants
silver and golden; bustards and ostriches: the latter, bestridden each
by a tiny cupid, were led on in golden leashes, followed by antelopes
and oryxes, elks from beyond the Danube, four-horned rams from the Isles
of the Hyperborean Ocean, and the strange hybrid of the Libyan hills,
believed by all spectators to be half-bull half-horse. And then a murmur
of delighted awe ran through the theatre, as bears and leopards, lions
and tigers, fettered in heavy chains of gold, and made gentle for the
occasion by narcotics, paced sedately down the slope, obedient to
their beautiful guides; while behind them, the unwieldy bulk of two
double-horned rhinoceroses, from the far south, was overtopped by the
long slender necks and large soft eyes of a pair of giraffes, such as
had not been seen in Alexandria for more than fifty years.

A cry arose of ‘Orestes! Orestes! Health to the illustrious Prefect!
Thanks for his bounty!’ And a hired voice or two among the crowd
cried, ‘Hail to Orestes! Hail, Emperor of Africa!’.... But there was no
response.

‘The rose is still in the bud,’ simpered Orestes to Hypatia. He rose,
beckoned and bowed the crowd into silence; and then, after a short
pantomimic exhibition of rapturous gratitude and humility, pointed
triumphantly to the palm avenue, among the shadows of which appeared
the wonder of the day--the huge tusks and trunk of the white elephant
himself.

There it was at last! Not a doubt of it! A real elephant, and yet as
white as snow. Sight never seen before in Alexandria--never to be seen
again! ‘Oh, thrice blest men of Macedonia!’ shouted some worthy on
high, ‘the gods are bountiful to you this day!’ And all mouths and eyes
confirmed the opinion, as they opened wider and yet wider to drink in
the inexhaustible joy and glory.

On he paced solemnly, while the whole theatre resounded to his heavy
tread, and the Fauns and Dryads fled in terror. A choir of nymphs swung
round him hand in hand, and sang, as they danced along, the conquering
might of Beauty, the tamer of beasts and men and deities. Skirmishing
parties of little winged cupids spread themselves over the orchestra,
from left to right, and pelted the spectators with perfumed comfits,
shot among them from their tiny bows arrows of fragrant sandal-wood, or
swung smoking censers, which loaded the air with intoxicating odours.

The procession came on down the slope, and the elephant approached the
spectators; his tusks were wreathed with roses and myrtles; his ears
were pierced with splendid earrings, a jewelled frontlet hung between
his eyes; Eros himself, a lovely winged boy, sat on his neck, and guided
him with the point of a golden arrow. But what precious thing was
it which that shell-formed car upon his back contained? The goddess!
Pelagia Aphrodite herself?

Yes; whiter than the snow-white elephant--more rosy than the pink-tipped
shell in which she lay, among crimson cushions and silver gauze, there
shone the goddess, thrilling all hearts with those delicious smiles, and
glances of the bashful playful eyes, and grateful wavings of her tiny
hand, as the whole theatre rose with one accord, and ten thousand eyes
were concentrated on the unequalled loveliness beneath them.

Twice the procession passed round the whole circumference of the
orchestra, and then returning from the foot of the slope towards the
central group around Hephaestus, deployed right and left in front of the
stage. The lions and tigers were led away into the side passages; the
youths and maidens combined themselves with the gentler animals into
groups lessening gradually from the centre to the wings, and stood
expectant, while the elephant came forward, and knelt behind the
platform destined for the goddess.

The valves of the shell closed. The Graces unloosed the fastenings of
the car. The elephant turned his trunk over his back, and, guided by
the hands of the girls, grasped the shell, and lifting it high in air,
deposited it on the steps at the back of the platform.

Hephaestus limped forward, and, with his most uncouth gestures,
signified the delight which he had in bestowing such a sight upon his
faithful artisans of Alexandria, and the unspeakable enjoyment which
they were to expect from the mystic dance of the goddess; and then
retired, leaving the Graces to advance in front of the platform,
and with their arms twined round each other, begin Hypatia’s song of
invocation.

As the first strophe died away, the valves of the shell reopened, and
discovered Aphrodite crouching on one knee within. She raised her head,
and gazed around the vast circle of seats. A mild surprise was on her
countenance, which quickened into delightful wonder, and bashfulness
struggling with the sense of new enjoyment and new powers. She glanced
downward at herself; and smiled, astonished at her own loveliness; then
upward at the sky; and seemed ready, with an awful joy, to spring up
into the boundless void. Her whole figure dilated; she seemed to drink
in strength from every object which met her in the great universe
around; and slowly, from among the shells and seaweeds, she rose to
her full height, the mystic cestus glittering round her waist, in deep
festoons of emeralds and pearls, and stepped forward upon the marble
sea-floor, wringing the dripping perfume from her locks, as Aphrodite
rose of old.

For the first minute the crowd was too breathless with pleasure to think
of applause. But the goddess seemed to require due homage; and when she
folded her arms across her bosom, and stood motionless for an instant,
as if to demand the worship of the universe, every tongue was loosed,
and a thunder-clap of ‘Aphrodite!’ rang out across the roofs of
Alexandria, and startled Cyril in his chamber at the Serapeium, and
weary muleteers on distant sand-hills, and dozing mariners far out at
sea.

And then began a miracle of art, such as was only possible among a
people of the free and exquisite physical training, and the delicate
aesthetic perception of those old Greeks, even in their most fallen
days. A dance, in which every motion was a word, and rest as eloquent as
motion; in which every attitude was a fresh motive for a sculptor of the
purest school, and the highest physical activity was manifested, not
as in the coarser comic pantomimes, in fantastic bounds and unnatural
distortions, but in perpetual delicate modulations of a stately and
self-restraining grace. The artist was for the moment transformed into
the goddess. The theatre, and Alexandria, and the gorgeous pageant
beyond, had vanished from her imagination, and therefore from the
imagination of the spectators, under the constraining inspiration of
her art, and they and she alike saw nothing but the lonely sea around
Cytherea, and the goddess hovering above its emerald mirror, saying
forth on sea, and air, and shore, beauty, and joy, and love....

Philammon’s eyes were bursting from his head with shame and horror: and
yet he could not hate her; not even despise her. He would have done so,
had there been the faintest trace of human feeling in her countenance to
prove that some germ of moral sense lingered within: but even the faint
blush and the downcast eye with which she had entered the theatre were
gone; and the only expression on her face was that of intense enjoyment
of her own activity and skill, and satisfied vanity, as of a petted
child.... Was she accountable? A reasonable soul, capable of right or
wrong at all? He hoped not .... He would trust not.... And still Pelagia
danced on; and for a whole age of agony, he could see nothing in heaven
or earth but the bewildering maze of those white feet, as they twinkled
over their white image in the marble mirror.... At last it was
over. Every limb suddenly collapsed, and she stood drooping in soft
self-satisfied fatigue, awaiting the burst of applause which rang
through Philammon’s ears, proclaiming to heaven and earth, as with a
mighty trumpet-blast, his sister’s shame.

The elephant rose, and moved forward to the side of the slabs. His back
was covered with crimson cushions, on which it seemed Aphrodite was
to return without her shell. She folded her arms across her bosom, and
stood smiling, as the elephant gently wreathed his trunk around her
waist, and lifted her slowly from the slab, in act to place her on his
back....

The little feet, clinging half fearfully together, had Just risen from
the marble-The elephant started, dropped his delicate burden heavily on
the slab, looked down, raised his forefoot, and throwing his trunk into
the air, gave a shrill scream of terror and disgust....

The foot was red with blood--the young boy’s blood--which was soaking
and bubbling up through the fresh sand where the elephant had trodden,
in a round, dark, purple spot....

Philammon could bear no more. Another moment and he had hurled down
through the dense mass of spectators, clearing rank after rank of
seats by the sheer strength of madness, leaped the balustrade into
the orchestra below, and rushed across the space to the foot of the
platform.

‘Pelagia! Sister! My sister! Have mercy on me! on yourself! I will hide
you! save you! and we will flee together out of this infernal place!
this world of devils! I am your brother! Come!’

She looked at him one moment with wide, wild eyes--The truth flashed on
her--

‘Brother!’

And she sprang from the platform into his arms.... A vision of a lofty
window in Athens, looking out over far olive-yards and gardens, and the
bright roofs and basins of the Piraeus, and the broad blue sea, with the
purple peaks of Aegina beyond all.... And a dark-eyed boy, with his
arm around her neck, pointed laughing to the twinkling masts in the far
harbour, and called her sister.... The dead soul woke within her; and
with a wild cry she recoiled from him in an agony of shame, and covering
her face with both her hands, sank down among the blood-stained sand.

A yell, as of all hell broke loose, rang along that vast circle--

‘Down with him!’ ‘Away with him!’ ‘Crucify the slave!’ ‘Give the
barbarian to the beasts!’ ‘To the beasts with him, noble Prefect!’ A
crowd of attendants rushed upon him, and many of the spectators sprang
from their seats, and were on the point of leaping down into the
orchestra.

Philammon turned upon them like a lion at bay; and clear and loud his
voice rose through the roar of the multitude.

‘Ay! murder me as the Romans murdered Saint Telemachus! Slaves as
besotted and accursed as your besotted and accursed tyrants! Lower than
the beasts whom you employ as your butchers! Murder and lust go fitly
hand in hand, and the throne of my sister’s shame is well built on the
blood of innocents! Let my death end the devil’s sacrifice, and fill up
the cup of your iniquity!’

‘To the beasts!’ ‘Make the elephant trample him to powder!’

And the huge brute, goaded on by the attendants, rushed on the youth,
while Eros leaped from his neck, and fled weeping up the slope.

He caught Philammon in his trunk and raised him high in air. For an
instant the great bellowing ocean of heads spun round and round. He
tried to breathe one prayer, and shut his eyes--Pelagia’s voice rang
sweet and clear, even in the shrillness of intense agony--

‘Spare him! He is my brother! Forgive him, men of Macedonia! For
Pelagia’s sake-- Your Pelagia! One boon--only this one!’

And she stretched her arms imploringly toward the spectators, and then
clasping the huge knees of the elephant, called madly to it in terms of
passionate entreaty and endearment.

The men wavered. The brute did not. Quietly he lowered his trunk, and
set down Philammon on his feet. The monk was saved. Breathless and
dizzy, he found himself hurried away by the attendants, dragged through
dark passages, and hurled out into the street, with curses, warnings,
and congratulations, which fell on an unheeding ear.

But Pelagia kept her face still hidden in her hands, and rising, walked
slowly back, crushed by the weight of some tremendous awe, across the
orchestra, and up the slope; and vanished among the palms and oleanders,
regardless of the applause and entreaties, and jeers, and threats, and
curses, of that great multitude of sinful slaves.

For a moment all Orestes’s spells seemed broken by this unexpected
catastrophe. A cloud, whether of disgust or of disappointment, hung upon
every brow. More than one Christian rose hastily to depart, touched with
real remorse and shame at the horrors of which they had been the willing
witnesses. The common people behind, having glutted their curiosity with
all that there was to see, began openly to murmur at the cruelty and
heathenry of it. Hypatia, utterly unnerved, hid her face in both her
hands. Orestes alone rose with the crisis. Now, or never, was the time
for action; and stepping forward, with his most graceful obeisance,
waved his hand for silence, and began his well-studied oration.

‘Let me not, O men of Macedonia, suppose that you can be disturbed from
that equanimity which befits politicians, by so light an accident as
the caprice of a dancer. The spectacle which I have had the honour and
delight of exhibiting to you--(Roars and applause from the liberated
prisoners and the young gentlemen)--and on which it seemed to me you
have deigned to look with not altogether unkindly eyes--(Fresh applause,
in which the Christian mob, relenting, began to join)--is but a pleasant
prelude to that more serious business for which I have drawn you here
together. Other testimonials of my good intentions have not been wanting
in the release of suffering innocence, and in the largess of food, the
growth and natural property of Egypt, destined by your late tyrants to
pamper the luxury of a distant court.... Why should I boast?--yet even
now this head is weary, these limbs fail me, worn out in ceaseless
efforts for your welfare, and in the perpetual administration of the
strictest justice. For a time has come in which the Macedonian race,
whose boast is the gorgeous city of Alexander, must rise again to the
political pre-eminence which they held of old, and becoming once more
the masters of one-third of the universe, be treated by their rulers
as freemen, citizens, heroes, who have a right to choose and to employ
their rulers--Rulers, did I say? Let us forget the word, and substitute
in its place the more philosophic term of ministers. To be your
minister--the servant of you all--To sacrifice myself, my leisure,
health, life, if need be, to the one great object of securing the
independence of Alexandria--This is my work, my hope, my glory--longed
for through weary years: now for the first time possible by the fall
of the late puppet Emperor of Rome. Men of Macedonia, remember that
Honorius reigns no more! An African sits on the throne of the Caesars!
Heraclian, by one decisive victory, has gained, by the favour of--of
Heaven, the imperial purple; and a new era opens for the world. Let the
conqueror of Rome balance his account with that Byzantine court, so long
the incubus of our Trans-Mediterranean wealth and civilisation; and let
a free, independent, and united Africa rally round the palaces and
docks of Alexandria, and find there its natural centre of polity and of
prosperity.’

A roar of hired applause interrupted him and not a few, half for the
sake of his compliments and fine words, half from a natural wish to be
on the right side--namely, the one which happened to be in the ascendant
for the time being--joined.... The city authorities were on the point
of crying, ‘Imperator Orestes,’ but thought better of it; and waited for
some one else to cry first--being respectable. Whereon the Prefect
of the Guards, being a man of some presence of mind, and also not in
anywise respectable, pricked up the Prefect of the docks with the point
of his dagger, and bade him, with a fearful threat, take care how he
played traitor. The worthy burgher roared incontinently--whether with
pain or patriotism; and the whole array of respectabilities--having
found a Curtius who would leap into the gulf, joined in unanimous
chorus, and saluted Orestes as Emperor; while Hypatia, amid the shouts
of her aristocratic scholars, rose and knelt before him, writhing
inwardly with shame and despair, and entreated him to accept that
tutelage of Greek commerce, supremacy, and philosophy which was forced
on him by the unanimous voice of an adoring people....

‘It is false!’ shouted a voice from the highest tiers, appropriated
to the women of the lower classes, which made all turn their heads in
bewilderment.

‘False! false! you are tricked! He is tricked! Heraclian was utterly
routed at Ostia, and is fled to Carthage, with the emperor’s fleet in
chase.’

‘She lies! Drag the beast down!’ cried Orestes, utterly thrown off his
balance by the sudden check.

‘She? He! I, a monk, brought the news! Cyril has known it--every Jew in
the Delta has known it, for a week past! So perish all the enemies of
the Lord, caught in their own snare!’

And bursting desperately through the women who surrounded him, the monk
vanished.

An awful silence fell on all who heard. For a minute every man looked in
his neighbour’s face as if he longed to cut his throat, and get rid of
one witness, at least, of his treason. And then arose a tumult, which
Orestes in vain attempted to subdue. Whether the populace believed the
monk’s words or not, they were panic-stricken at the mere possibility
of their truth. Hoarse with denying, protesting, appealing, the would-be
emperor had at last to summon his guards around him and Hypatia, and
make his way out of the theatre as best he could; while the multitude
melted away like snow before the rain, and poured out into the streets
in eddying and roaring streams, to find every church placarded by Cyril
with the particulars of Heraclian’s ruin.



CHAPTER XXIII: NEMESIS


That evening was a hideous one in the palace of Orestes. His agonies
of disappointment, rage, and terror were at once so shameful and so
fearful, that none of his slaves dare approach him; and it was not till
late that his confidential secretary, the Chaldean eunuch, driven by
terror of the exasperated Catholics, ventured into the tiger’s den, and
represented to him the immediate necessity for action.

What could he do? He was committed--Cyril only knew how deeply. What
might not the wily archbishop have discovered? What might not he pretend
to have discovered? What accusations might he not send off on the spot
to the Byzantine Court?

‘Let the gates be guarded, and no one allowed to leave the city,’
suggested the Chaldee.

‘Keep in monks? as well keep in rats! No; we must send off a
counter-report, instantly.’

‘What shall I say, your Excellency?’ quoth the ready scribe, pulling out
pen and inkhorn from his sash.

‘What do I care? Any lie which comes to hand. What in the devil’s name
are you here for at all, but to invent a lie when I want one?’

‘True, most noble,’ and the worthy sat meekly down to his paper.... but
did not proceed rapidly.

‘I don’t see anything that would suit the emergency, unless I stated,
with your august leave, that Cyril, and not you, celebrated the
gladiatorial exhibition; which might hardly appear credible?’

Orestes burst out laughing, in spite of himself. The sleek Chaldee
smiled and purred in return. The victory was won; and Orestes, somewhat
more master of himself, began to turn his vulpine cunning to the one
absorbing question of the saving of his worthless neck.

‘No, that would be too good. Write, that we had discovered a plot on
Cyril’s part to incorporate the whole of the African churches (mind and
specify Carthage and Hippo) under his own jurisdiction, and to throw off
allegiance to the Patriarch of Constantinople, in case of Heraclian’s
success.’

The secretary purred delighted approval, and scribbled away now with
right good heart.

‘Heraclian’s success, your Excellency.’

‘We of course desired, by every means in our power, to gratify the
people of Alexandria, and, as was our duty, to excite by every lawful
method their loyalty toward the throne of the Caesars (never mind who
sat on it) at so critical a moment.’

‘So critical a moment....’

‘But as faithful Catholics, and abhorring even in the extremest need,
the sin of Uzzah, we dreaded to touch with the unsanctified hands
of laymen the consecrated ark of the Church, even though for its
preservation....’

‘Its preservation, your Excellency....’

‘We, therefore, as civil magistrates, felt bound to confine ourselves
to those means which were already allowed by law and custom to our
jurisdiction; and accordingly made use of those largesses, spectacles,
and public execution of rebels, which have unhappily appeared to his
holiness the patriarch (too ready, perhaps, to find a cause of complaint
against faithful adherents of the Byzantine See) to partake of the
nature of those gladiatorial exhibitions, which are equally abhorrent
to the spirit of the Catholic Church, and to the charity of the sainted
emperors by whose pious edicts they have been long since abolished.’

‘Your Excellency is indeed great.... but--pardon your slave’s remark--my
simplicity is of opinion that it may be asked why you did not inform the
Augusta Pulcheria of Cyril’s conspiracy?’

‘Say that we sent a messenger off three months ago, but that.... Make
something happen to him, stupid, and save me the trouble.’

‘Shall I kill him by Arabs in the neighbourhood of Palmyra, your
Excellency?’

‘Let me see.... No. They may make inquiries there. Drown him at sea.
Nobody can ask questions of the sharks.’

‘Foundered between Tyre and Crete, from which sad calamity only one man
escaped on a raft, and being picked tip, after three weeks’ exposure to
the fury of the elements, by a returning wheat-ship--By the bye, most
noble, what am I to say about those wheat-ships not having even sailed?’

‘Head of Augustus! I forgot them utterly. Say that--say that the plague
was making such ravages in the harbour quarter that we feared carrying
the infection to the seat of the empire; and let them sail to-morrow.’

The secretary’s face lengthened.

‘My fidelity is compelled to remark, even at the risk of your just
indignation, that half of them have been unloaded again for your
munificent largesses of the last two days.’

Orestes swore a great oath.

‘Oh, that the mob had but one throat, that I might give them an emetic!
Well, we must buy more corn, that’s all.’

The secretary’s face grew longer still.

‘The Jews, most August--’

‘What of them?’ yelled the hapless Prefect. ‘Have they been
forestalling?’

‘My assiduity has discovered this afternoon that they have been buying
up and exporting all the provisions which they could obtain.’

‘Scoundrels! Then they must have known of Heraclian’s failure!’

‘Your sagacity has, I fear, divined the truth. They have been betting
largely against his success for the last week, both in Canopus and
Pelusium.’

‘For the last week! Then Miriam betrayed me knowingly!’ And Orestes
broke forth again into a paroxysm of fury.

‘Here--call the tribune of the guard! A hundred gold pieces to the man
who brings me the witch alive!’

‘She will never be taken alive.’

‘Dead, then--in any way! Go, you Chaldee hound! what are you hesitating
about?’

‘Most noble lord,’ said the secretary, prostrating himself upon the
floor, and kissing his master’s feet in an agony of fear....

‘Remember, that if you touch one Jew you touch all! Remember the bonds!
remember the--the--your own most august reputation, in short.’

‘Get up, brute, and don’t grovel there, but tell me what you mean, like
a human being. If old Miriam is once dead, her bonds die with her, don’t
they?’

‘Alas, my lord, you do not know the customs of that accursed folk. They
have a damnable practice of treating every member of their nation as a
brother, and helping each freely and faithfully without reward; whereby
they are enabled to plunder all the rest of the world, and thrive
themselves, from the least to the greatest. Don’t fancy that your bonds
are in Miriam’s hands. They have been transferred months ago. Your
real creditors may be in Carthage, or Rome, or Byzantium, and they will
attack you from thence; while all that you would find if you seized the
old witch’s property, would be papers, useless to you, belonging to
Jews all over the empire, who would rise as one man in defence of their
money. I assure you, it is a net without a bound. If you touch one you
touch all.... And besides, my diligence, expecting some such command,
has already taken the liberty of making inquiries as to Miriam’s place
of abode; but it appears, I am sorry to say, utterly unknown to any of
your Excellency’s servants.’

‘You lie!’ said Orestes.... ‘I would much sooner believe that you have
been warning the hag to keep out of the way.’

Orestes had spoken, for that once in his life, the exact truth.

The secretary, who had his own private dealings with Miriam, felt every
particular atom of his skin shudder at those words; and had he had hair
on his head, it would certainly have betrayed him by standing visibly on
end. But as he was, luckily for him, close shaven, his turban remained
in its proper place, as he meekly replied-- ‘Alas! a faithful servant can
feel no keener woe than the causeless suspicion of that sun before whose
rays he daily prostrates his--’

‘Confound your periphrases! Do you know where she is?’

‘No!’ cried the wretched secretary, driven to the lie direct at last;
and confirmed the negation with such a string of oaths, that Orestes
stopped his volubility with a kick, borrowed of him, under threat of
torture, a thousand gold pieces as largess to the soldiery, and ended
by concentrating the stationaries round his own palace, for the double
purpose of protecting himself in case of a riot, and of increasing the
chances of the said riot, by leaving the distant quarters of the city
without police.

‘If Cyril would but make a fool of himself, now that he is in the
full-blown pride of victory--the rascal!--about that Ammonius, or about
Hypatia, or anything else, and give me a real handle against him! After
all, truth works better than lying now and then. Oh, that I could poison
him! But one can’t bribe those ecclesiastics; and as for the dagger, one
could not hire a man to be torn in pieces by monks. No; I must just sit
still, and see what Fortune’s dice may turn up. Well, your pedants like
Aristides or Epaminondas--thank Heaven, the race of them has died
out long ago!--might call this no very creditable piece of provincial
legislation; but after all, it is about as good as any now going, or
likely to be going till the world’s end; and one can’t be expected to
strike out a new path. I shall stick to the wisdom of my predecessors,
and--oh, that Cyril may make a fool of himself to-night!’

And Cyril did make a fool of himself that night, for the first and last
time in his life; and suffers for it, as wise men are wont to do when
they err, to this very day and hour: but how much Orestes gained by his
foe’s false move cannot be decided till the end of this story; perhaps
not even then.



CHAPTER XXIV: LOST LAMBS


And Philammon?

For a long while he stood in the street outside the theatre, too much
maddened to determine on any course of action; and, ere he had recovered
his self-possession, the crowd began to pour from every outlet, and
filling the street, swept him away in its stream.

Then, as he heard his sister’s name, in every tone of pity, contempt,
and horror, mingle with their angry exclamations, he awoke from his
dream, and, bursting through the mob, made straight for Pelagia’s house.

It was fast closed; and his repeated knocks at the gate brought only,
after long waiting, a surly negro face to a little wicket.

He asked eagerly and instinctively for Pelagia; of course she had not
yet returned. For Wulf he was not within. And then he took his station
close to the gateway, while his heart beat loud with hope and dread.

At last the Goths appeared, forcing their way through the mob in a close
column. There were no litters with them. Where, then, were Pelagia and
her girls? Where, too, was the hated figure of the Amal? and Wulf, and
Smid? The men came on, led by Goderic and Agilmund, with folded arms,
knitted brows, downcast eyes: a stern disgust, not unmingled with shame,
on every countenance, told Philammon afresh of his sister’s infamy.

Goderic passed him close, and Philammon summoned up courage to ask for
Wulf.... Pelagia he had not courage to name.

‘Out, Greek hound! we have seen enough of your accursed race to-day!
What? are you trying to follow us in?’ And the young man’s sword flashed
from its sheath so swiftly, that Philammon had but just time enough
to spring back into the street, and wait there, in an agony of
disappointment and anxiety, as the gates slid together again, and the
house was as silent as before.

For a miserable hour he waited, while the mob thickened instead of
flowing away, and the scattered groups of chatterers began to form
themselves into masses, and parade the streets with shouts of ‘Down with
the heathen!’ ‘Down with the idolaters!’ ‘Vengeance on all blaspheming
harlots!’

At last the steady tramp of legionaries, and in the midst of the
glittering lines of armed men--oh, joy!--a string of litters!

He sprang forward, and called Pelagia’s name again and again. Once he
fancied he heard an answer: but the soldiers thrust him back.

‘She is safe here, young fool, and has seen and been seen quite enough
to-day already. Back!’

‘Let me speak to her!’

‘That is her business. Ours is now to see her home safe.’

‘Let me go in with you, I beseech!’

‘If you want to go in, knock for yourself when we are gone. If you have
any business in the house, they will open to you, I suppose. Out, you
interfering puppy!’

And a blow of the spear-butt in his chest sent him rolling back into
the middle of the street, while the soldiers, having delivered up their
charge, returned with the same stolid indifference. In vain Philammon,
returning, knocked at the gate. Curses and threats from the negro were
all the answer which he received; and at last, wearied into desperation,
he wandered away, up one street and down another, struggling in vain to
form some plan of action for himself, until the sun was set.

Wearily he went homewards at last. Once the thought of Miriam crossed
his mind. It was a disgusting alternative to ask help of her, the very
author of his sister’s shame: but yet she at least could obtain for him
a sight of Pelagia; she had promised as much. But then--the condition
which she had appended to her help! To see his sister, and yet to leave
her as she was!--Horrible contradiction! But could he not employ Miriam
for his own ends?--outwit her?--deceive her?--for it came to that. The
temptation was intense: but it lasted only a moment. Could he defile so
pure a cause by falsehood? And hurrying past the Jewess’s door, hardly
daring to look at it, lest the temptation should return, he darted
upstairs to his own little chamber, hastily flung open the door, and
stopped short in astonishment.

A woman, covered from head to foot in a large dark veil, stood in the
centre of the chamber.

‘Who are you? This is no place for you!’ cried he, after a minute’s
pause. She replied only by a shudder and a sob.... He caught sight,
beneath the folds of the veil, of a too well-known saffron shawl, and
springing upon her like the lion on the lamb, clasped to his bosom his
sister.

The veil fell from her beautiful forehead. She gazed into his eyes
one moment with a look of terrified inquiry, and saw nothing there but
love.... And clinging heart to heart, brother and sister mingled holy
kisses, and strained nearer and nearer still, as if to satisfy their
last lingering doubts of each other’s kin.

Many a minute passed in silent joy.... Philammon dare not speak; he dare
not ask her what brought her thither--dare not wake her to recollect
the frightful present by questions of the past, of his long forgotten
parents, their home, her history.... And, after all, was it not enough
for him that he held her at last?--her, there by her own will--the lost
lamb returned to him?--and their tears mingled as their cheeks were
pressed together.

At last she spoke.

‘I ought to have known you,--I believe I did know you from the first
day! When they mentioned your likeness to me, my heart leapt up
within me; and a voice whispered.... but I would not hear it! I was
ashamed--ashamed to acknowledge my brother, for whom I had sought and
longed for years.... ashamed to think that I had a brother.... Ah, God!
and ought I not to be ashamed?’

And she broke from him again, and threw herself on the floor.

‘Trample upon me; curse me!--anything but part me from him!’

Philammon had not the heart to answer her; but he made an involuntary
gesture of sorrowful dissent.

‘No! Call me what I am!--what he called me just now!--but do not take me
away! Strike me, as he struck me!--anything but parting!’

‘Struck you? The curse of God be on him!’

‘Ah, do not curse him!--not him! It was not a blow, indeed!--only a
push--a touch--and it was my fault--all mine. I angered him--I upbraided
him;--I was mad.... Oh, why did he deceive me? Why did he let me
dance?--command me to dance?’

‘Command you?’

‘He said that we must not break our words. He would not hear me, when I
told him that we could deny having promised. I said that promises made
over the wine need never be kept. Who ever heard of keeping them? And
Orestes was drunk, too. But he said that I might teach a Goth to be what
I liked, except a liar.... Was not that a strange speech?.... And Wulf
bade him be strong, and blest him for it.’

‘He was right,’ sobbed Philammon.

‘Then I thought he would love me for obeying him, though I loathed
it!--Oh, God, how I loathed it!.... But how could I fancy that he did
not like my doing it? Who ever heard of any one doing of their own will
what they did not like?’

Philammon sobbed again, as the poor civilised savage artlessly opened to
him all her moral darkness. What could he say?.... he knew what to say.
The disease was so utterly patent, that any of Cyril’s school-children
could have supplied the remedy. But how to speak it?--how to tell her,
before all things, as he longed to do, that there was no hope of her
marrying the Amal, and, therefore, no peace for her till she left him.

‘Then you did hate the--the--’ said he, at last, catching at some gleam
of light.

‘Hate it? Do I not belong, body and soul, to him?--him only?.... And
yet.... Oh, I must tell you all! When I and the girls began to
practise, all the old feelings came back--the love of being admired, and
applauded, and cheered; and dancing is so delicious!--so delicious to
feel that you are doing anything beautiful perfectly, and better than
every one else!.... And he saw that I liked it, and despised me for
it.... And, deceitful!--he little guessed how much of the pains which
I took were taken to please him, to do my best before him, to win
admiration, only that I might take it home and throw it all at his
beloved feet, and make the world say once more, “She has all Alexandria
to worship her, and yet she cares for that one Goth more than for--” But
he deceived me, true man that he is! He wished to enjoy my smiles to
the last moment, and then to cast me off, when I had once given him an
excuse.... Too cowardly to upbraid me, he let me ruin myself, to save
him the trouble of ruining me. Oh, men, men! all alike! They love us for
their own sakes, and we love them for love’s sake. We live by love, we
die for love, and yet we never find it, but only selfishness dressed
up in love’s mask.... And then we take up with that, poor, fond,
self-blinded creatures that we are!--and in spite of the poisoned hearts
around us, persuade ourselves that our latest asp’s egg, at least, will
hatch into a dove, and that though all men are faithless, our own tyrant
can never change, for he is more than man!’

‘But he has deceived you! You have found out your mistake. Leave him,
then, as he deserves!’

Pelagia looked up, with something of a tender smile. ‘Poor darling!
Little do you know of love!’

Philammon, utterly bewildered by this newest and strangest phase of
human passion, could only gasp out--

‘But do you not love me, too, my sister?’

‘Do I not love you? But not as I love him! Oh, hush, hush!--, you cannot
understand yet!’ And Pelagia hid her face in her hands, while convulsive
shudderings ran through every limb....

‘I must do it! I must! I will dare every thing, stoop to everything for
love’s sake! Go to her!--to the wise woman!--to Hypatia! She loves you!
I know that she loves you! She will hear you, though she will not me!’

‘Hypatia? Do you know that she was sitting there unmoved at--in the
theatre?’

‘She was forced! Orestes compelled her! Miriam told me so. And I saw it
in her face. As I passed beneath her, I looked up; and she was as pale
as ivory, trembling in every limb. There was a dark hollow round her
eyes--she had been weeping, I saw. And I sneered in my mad self-conceit,
and said, “She looks as if she was going to be crucified, not married!”.
But now, now!--Oh, go to her! Tell her that I will give her all I
have--jewels, money, dresses, house! Tell her that I--I--entreat
her pardon, that I will crawl to her feet myself and ask it, if she
requires!--Only let her teach me--teach me to be wise and good,
and honoured, and respected, as she is! Ask her to tell a poor
broken-hearted woman her secret. She can make old Wulf, and him, and
Orestes even, and the magistrates, respect her.... Ask her to teach me
how to be like her, and to make him respect me again, and I will give
her all--all!’

Philammon hesitated. Something within warned him, as the Daemon used
to warn Socrates, that his errand would be bootless. He thought of the
theatre, and of that firm, compressed lip; and forgot the hollow eye of
misery which accompanied it, in his wrath against his lately-worshipped
idol.

‘Oh, go! go! I tell you it was against her will. She felt for me--I saw
it--Oh, God! when I did not feel for myself! And I hated her, because
she seemed to despise me in my fool’s triumph! She cannot despise me
now in my misery.... Go! Go! or you will drive me to the agony of going
myself.’

There was but one thing to be done.

‘You will wait, then, here? You will not leave me again?’

‘Yes. But you must be quick! If he finds out that I am away, he may
fancy.... Ah, heaven! let him kill me, but never let him be jealous of
me! Go now! this moment! Take this as an earnest--the cestus which I
wore there. Horrid thing! I hate the sight of it! But I brought it with
me on purpose, or I would have thrown it into the canal. There; say it
is an earnest--only an earnest--of what I will give her!’

In ten minutes more Philammon was in Hypatia’s hall. The household
seemed full of terror and disturbance; the hall was full of soldiers. At
last Hypatia’s favourite maid passed, and knew him. Her mistress could
not speak with any one. Where was Theon, then? He, too, had shut himself
up. Never mind. Philammon must, would speak with him. And he pleaded
so passionately and so sweetly, that the soft-hearted damsel, unable to
resist so handsome a suppliant, undertook his errand, and led him up
to the library, where Theon, pale as death, was pacing to and fro,
apparently half beside himself with terror.

Philammon’s breathless message fell at first upon unheeding ears.

‘A new pupil, sir! Is this a time for pupils; when my house, my
daughter’s life, is not safe? Wretch that I am! And have I led her into
the snare? I, with my vain ambition and covetousness! Oh, my child! my
child! my one treasure! Oh, the double curse which will light upon me,
if--’

‘She asks for but one interview.’

‘With my daughter, sir? Pelagia! Will you insult me? Do you suppose,
even if her own pity should so far tempt her to degrade herself, that I
could allow her so to contaminate her purity?’

‘Your terror, sir, excuses your rudeness.’

‘Rudeness, sir? the rudeness lies in your intruding on us at such a
moment!’

‘Then this, perhaps, may, in your eyes at least, excuse me in my turn.’
And Philammon held out the cestus. ‘You are a better judge of its value
than I. But I am commissioned to say, that it is only an earnest of what
she will give willingly and at once, even to the half of her wealth, for
the honour of becoming your daughter’s pupil.’ And he laid the jewelled
girdle on the table.

The old man halted in his walk. The emeralds and pearls shone like the
galaxy. He looked at them; and walked on again more slowly.... What
might be their value? What might it not be? At least, they would pay all
his debts.... And after hovering to and fro for another minute before
the bait, he turned to Philammon.

‘If you would promise to mention the thing to no one--’

‘I will promise.’

‘And in case my daughter, as I have a right to expect, shall refuse--’

‘Let her keep the jewels. Their owner has learnt, thank God, to despise
and hate them! Let her keep the jewels--and my curse! For God do so to
me, and more also, if I ever see her face again!’

The old man had not heard the latter part of Philammon’s speech. He had
seized his bait as greedily as a crocodile, and hurried off with it into
Hypatia’s chamber, while Philammon stood expectant; possessed with a new
and fearful doubt. ‘Degrade herself!’ ‘Contaminate her purity!’ If
that notion were to be the fruit of all her philosophy? If selfishness,
pride, Pharisaism, were all its outcome? Why--had they not been its
outcome already? When had he seen her helping, even pitying, the poor,
the outcast? When had he heard from her one word of real sympathy for
the sorrowing; for the sinful?.... He was still lost in thought when
Theon re-entered, bringing a letter.

‘_From Hypatia to her well-beloved pupil_.

‘I pity you--how should I not? And more. I thank you for this your
request, for it shows me that my unwilling presence at the hideous
pageant of to-day has not alienated from me a soul of which I had
cherished the noblest hopes, for which I had sketched out the
loftiest destiny. But how shall I say it? Ask yourself whether a
change--apparently impossible--must not take place in her for whom you
plead, before she and I can meet. I am not so inhuman as to blame you
for having asked me; I do not even blame her for being what she is. She
does but follow her nature; who can be angry with her, if destiny have
informed so fair an animal with a too gross and earthly spirit? Why weep
over her? Dust she is, and unto dust she will return: while you, to
whom a more divine spark was allotted at your birth, must rise, and
unrepining, leave below you one only connected with you by the unreal
and fleeting bonds of fleshly kin.’

Philammon crushed the letter together in his hand, and strode from
the house without a word. The philosopher had no gospel, then, for the
harlot! No word for the sinner, the degraded! Destiny forsooth! She was
to follow her destiny, and be base, miserable, self-condemned. She was
to crush the voice of conscience and reason, as often as it awoke within
her, and compel herself to believe that she was bound to be that which
she knew herself bound not to be. She was to shut her eyes to that
present palpable misery which was preaching to her, with the voice of
God Himself, that the wages of sin are death. Dust she was, and unto
dust she will return! Oh, glorious hope for her, for him, who felt as
if an eternity of bliss would be worthless, if it parted him from his
new-found treasure! Dust she was, and unto dust she must return!

Hapless Hypatia! If she must needs misapply, after the fashion of her
school, a text or two here and there from the Hebrew Scriptures, what
suicidal fantasy set her on quoting that one? For now, upon Philammon’s
memory flashed up in letters of light, old words forgotten for
months--and ere he was aware, he found himself repeating aloud and
passionately, ‘I believe in the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of
the body, and the life everlasting,’.... and then clear and fair
arose before him the vision of the God-man, as He lay at meat in the
Pharisee’s house; and of her who washed His feet with tears, and wiped
them with the hairs of her head.... And from the depths of his agonised
heart arose the prayer, ‘Blessed Magdalene, intercede for her?’

So high he could rise, but not beyond. For the notion of that God-man
was receding fast to more and more awful abysmal heights, in the
minds of a generation who were forgetting His love in His power, and
practically losing sight of His humanity in their eager doctrinal
assertion of His Divinity. And Philammon’s heart re-echoed the spirit
of his age, when he felt that for an apostate like himself it were
presumptuous to entreat for any light or help from the fountain-head
itself. He who had denied his Lord, he who had voluntarily cut himself
off from the communion of the Catholic Church--how could he restore
himself? How could he appease the wrath of Him who died on the cross,
save by years of bitter supplication and self-punishment?....

‘Fool! Vain and ambitious fool that I have been! For this I threw away
the faith of my childhood! For this I listened to words at which I
shuddered; crushed down my own doubts and disgusts; tried to persuade
myself that I could reconcile them with Christianity--that I could make
a lie fit into the truth! For this I puffed myself up in the vain hope
of becoming not as other men are--superior, forsooth, to my kind! It was
not enough for me to be a man made in the image of God: but I must needs
become a god myself, knowing good and evil.--And here is the end! I call
upon my fine philosophy to help me once, in one real practical human
struggle, and it folds its arms and sits serene and silent, smiling upon
my misery! Oh! fool, fool, thou art filled with the fruit of thy own
devices! Back to the old faith! Home again, then wanderer! And yet how
home? Are not the gates shut against me? Perhaps against her too....
What if she, like me, were a baptized Christian?’

Terrible and all but hopeless that thought flashed across him, as in the
first revulsion of his conscience he plunged utterly and implicitly
back again into the faith of his childhood, and all the dark and cruel
theories popular in his day rose up before him in all their terrors. In
the innocent simplicity of the Laura he had never felt their force; but
he felt them now. If Pelagia were a baptized woman, what was before her
but unceasing penance? Before her, as before him, a life of cold
and hunger, groans and tears, loneliness and hideous soul-sickening
uncertainty. Life was a dungeon for them both henceforth. Be it so!
There was nothing else to believe in. No other rock of hope in earth
or heaven. That at least promised a possibility of forgiveness, of
amendment, of virtue, of reward--ay, of everlasting bliss and glory; and
even if she missed of that, better for her the cell in the desert than
a life of self-contented impurity! If that latter were her destiny, as
Hypatia said, she should at least die fighting against it, defying it,
cursing it! Better virtue with hell, than sin with heaven! And Hypatia
had not even promised her a heaven. The resurrection of the flesh was
too carnal a notion for her refined and lofty creed. And so, his four
months’ dream swept away in a moment, he hurried back to his chamber,
with one fixed thought before him--the desert; a cell for Pelagia;
another for himself. There they would repent, and pray, and mourn out
life side by side, if perhaps God would have mercy upon their souls.
Yet--perhaps, she might not have been baptized after all. And then
she was safe. Like other converts from Paganism, she might become a
catechumen, and go on to baptism, where the mystic water would wash
away in a moment all the past, and she would begin life afresh, in the
spotless robes of innocence. Yet he had been baptized, he knew from
Arsenius, before he left Athens; and she was older than he. It was
all but impossible yet he would hope; and breathless with anxiety
and excitement, he ran up the narrow stairs and found Miriam standing
outside, her hand upon the bolt, apparently inclined to dispute his
passage.

‘Is she still within?’

‘What if she be?’

‘Let me pass into my own room.’

‘Yours? Who has been paying the rent for you, these four months past?
You! What can you say to her? What can you do for her? Young pedant, you
must be in love yourself before you can help poor creatures who are in
love!’

But Philammon pushed past her so fiercely, that the old woman was
forced to give way, and with a sinister smile she followed him into the
chamber.

Pelagia sprang towards her brother.

‘Will she?--will she see me?’

‘Let us talk no more of her, my beloved,’ said Philammon, laying his
hands gently on her trembling shoulders, and looking earnestly into
her eyes.... ‘Better that we two should work out our deliverance for
ourselves, without the help of strangers. You can trust me?’

‘You? And can you help me? Will you teach me?’

‘Yes, but not here.... We must escape--Nay, hear me, one moment! dearest
sister, hear me! Are you so happy here that you can conceive of no
better place? And--and, oh, God! that it may not be true after all!--but
is there not a hell hereafter?’

Pelagia covered her face with her hands--‘The old monk warned me of it!’

‘Oh, take his warning....’ And Philammon was bursting forth with
some such words about the lake of fire and brimstone as he had been
accustomed to hear from Pambo and Arsenius, when Pelagia interrupted
him-- ‘Oh, Miriam! Is it true? Is it possible? What will become of me?’
almost shrieked the poor child.

‘What if it were true?--Let him tell you how he will save you from it,’
answered Miriam quietly.

‘Will not the Gospel save her from it--unbelieving Jew? Do not
contradict me! I can save her.’

‘If she does what?’

‘Can she not repent? Can she not mortify these base affections? Can
she not be forgiven? Oh, my Pelagia! forgive me for having dreamed one
moment that I could make you a philosopher, when you may be a saint of
God, a--’

He stopped short suddenly, as the thought about baptism flashed across
him, and in a faltering voice asked, ‘Are you baptized?’

‘Baptized?’ asked she, hardly understanding the term.

‘Yes--by the bishop--in the church.’

‘Ah,’ she said, ‘I remember now.... When I was four or five years
odd.... A tank, and women undressing.... And I was bathed too, and an
old man dipped my head under the water three times.... I have forgotten
what it all meant--it was so long ago. I wore a white dress, I know,
afterwards.’

Philammon recoiled with a groan.

‘Unhappy child! May God have mercy on you!’

‘Will He not forgive me, then? You have forgiven me. He?--He must be
more good even than you.--Why not?’

‘He forgave you then, freely, when you were baptized: and there is no
second pardon unless--

‘Unless I leave my love!’ shrieked Pelagia.

‘When the Lord forgave the blessed Magdalene freely, and told her
that her faith had saved her--did she live on in sin, or even in the
pleasures of this world? No! though God had forgiven her, she could not
forgive herself. She fled forth into the desert, and there, naked and
barefoot, clothed only with her hair, and feeding on the herb of the
field, she stayed fasting and praying till her dying day, never seeing
the face of man, but visited and comforted by angels and archangels. And
if she, she who never fell again, needed that long penance to work out
her own salvation--oh, Pelagia, what will not God require of you, who
have broken your baptismal vows, and defiled the white robes, which the
tears of penance only can wash clean once more?’

‘But I did not know! I did not ask to be baptized! Cruel, cruel parents,
to bring me to it! And God! Oh, why did He forgive me so soon? And to go
into the deserts! I dare not! I cannot! See me, how dedicate and tender
I am! I should die of hunger and cold! I should go mad with fear and
loneliness! Oh! brother, brother, is this the Gospel of the Christians?
I came to you to be taught how to be wise, and good, and respected, and
you tell me that all I can do is to live this horrible life of torture
here, on the chance of escaping torture forever! And how do I know that
I shall escape it? How do I know that I shall make myself miserable
enough? How do I know that He will forgive me after all? Is this true,
Miriam? Tell me, or I shall go mad!’

‘Yes,’ said Miriam, with a quiet sneer. ‘This is the gospel and good
news of salvation, according to the doctrine of the Nazarenes.’

‘I will go with you!’ cried Philammon. ‘I will go! I will never leave
you! I have my own sins to wash away!--Happy for me if I ever do
it!--And I will build you a cell near mine, and kind men will teach us,
and the will pray together night and morning, for ourselves and for each
other, and weep out our weary lives together--’

‘Better end them here, at once!’ said Pelagia, with a gesture of
despair, and dashed herself down on the floor.

Philammon was about to lift her up, when Miriam caught him by the arm,
and in a hurried whisper--‘Are you mad? Will you ruin your own purpose?
Why did you tell her this? Why did you not wait--give her hope--time
to collect herself--time to wean herself from her lover, instead of
terrifying and disgusting her at the outset, as you have done? Have you
a man’s heart in you? No word of comfort for that poor creature, nothing
but hell, hell, hell--See to your own chance of hell first! It is
greater than you fancy!’

‘It cannot be greater than I fancy!’

‘Then see to it. For her, poor darling!--why, even we Jews, who know
that all you Gentiles are doomed to Gehenna alike, have some sort of
hope for such a poor untaught creature as that.’

‘And why is she untaught? Wretch that you are. You have had the
training of her! You brought her up to sin and shame! You drove from her
recollection the faith in which she was baptized!’

‘So much the better for her, if the recollection of it is to make her
no happier than it does already. Better to wake unexpectedly in Gehenna
when you die, than to endure over and above the dread of it here. And
as for leaving her untaught, on your own showing she has been taught too
much already. Wiser it would be in you to curse your parents for having
had her baptized, than me for giving her ten years’ pleasure before she
goes to the pit of Tophet. Come now, don’t be angry with me. The old
Jewess is your friend, revile her as you will. She shall marry this
Goth.’

‘An Arian heretic!’

‘She shall convert him and make a Catholic of him, if you like. At all
events, if you wish to win her, you must win her my way. You have had
your chance, and spoiled it. Let me have mine. Pelagia, darling! Up, and
be a woman! We will find a philtre downstairs to give that ungrateful
man, that shall make him more mad about you, before a day is over, than
ever you were about him.’

‘No!’ said Pelagia, looking up. ‘No love-potions! No poisons!’

‘Poisons, little fool! Do you doubt the old woman’s skill? Do you think
I shall make him lose his wits, as Callisphyra did to her lover last
year, because she would trust to old Megaera’s drugs, instead of coming
to me!’

‘No! No drugs; no magic! He must love me really, or not at all! He
must love me for myself, because I am worth loving, because he honours,
worships me, or let me die. I, whose boast was, even when I was basest,
that I never needed such mean tricks, but conquered like Aphrodite, a
queen in my own right! I have been my own love-charm: when I cease to be
that, let me die!’

‘One as mad as the other!’ cried Miriam, in utter perplexity. ‘Hist!
what is that tramp upon the stairs?’

At this moment heavy footsteps were heard ascending the stairs.... All
three stopped aghast: Philammon, because he thought the visitors were
monks in search of him; Miriam, because she thought they were Orestes’s
guards in search of her; and Pelagia, from vague dread of anything and
everything....

‘Have you an inner room?’ asked the Jewess.

‘None.’

The old woman set her lips firmly, and drew her dagger. Pelagia wrapped
her face in her cloak, and stood trembling, bowed down, as if expecting
another blow. The door opened, and in walked, neither monks nor guard,
but Wulf and Smid.

‘Heyday, young monk!’ cried the latter worthy, with a loud laugh--‘Veils
here, too, eh? At your old trade, my worthy portress of hell-gate? Well,
walk out now; we have a little business with this young gentleman.’

And slipping past the unsuspecting Goths, Pelagia and Miriam hurried
downstairs.

‘The young one, at least, seems a little ashamed of her errand.... Now,
Wulf, speak low; and I will see that no one is listening at the door.’

Philammon faced his unexpected visitors with a look of angry inquiry.
What right had they, or any man, to intrude at such a moment on his
misery and disgrace?.... But he was disarmed the next instant by old
Wulf, who advanced to him, and looking him fully in the face with an
expression which there was no mistaking, held out his broad, brown hand.

Philammon grasped it, and then covering his face with his hands, burst
into tears.

‘You did right. You are a brave boy. If you had died, no man need have
been ashamed to die your death.’

‘You were there, then?’ sobbed Philammon.

‘We were.’

‘And what is more,’ said Smid, as the poor boy writhed at the admission,
‘we were mightily minded, some of us, to have leapt down to you and cut
you a passage out. One man, at least, whom I know of, felt his old blood
as hot for the minute as a four-year-old’s. The foul curs! And to hoot
her, after all! Oh that I may have one good hour’s hewing at them before
I die!’

‘And you shall!’ said Wulf. ‘Boy, you wish to get this sister of yours
into your power?’

‘It is hopeless--hopeless! She will never leave her--the Amal.’

‘Are you so sure of that?’

‘She told me so with her own lips not ten minutes ago. That was she who
went out as you entered!’

A curse of astonishment and regret burst from Smid....

‘Had I but known her! By the soul of my fathers, she should have found
that it was easier to come here than to go home again!’

‘Hush, Smid! Better as it is. Boy, if I put her into your power, dare
you carry her off?’

Philammon hesitated one moment.

‘What I dare you know already. But it would be an unlawful thing,
surely, to use violence.’

‘Settle your philosopher’s doubts for yourself. I have made my offer. I
should have thought that a man in his senses could give but one answer,
much more a mad monk.’

‘You forget the money matters, prince,’ said Smid, with a smile.

‘I do not. But I don’t think the boy so mean as to hesitate on that
account.’

‘He may as well know, however, that we promise to send all her trumpery
after her, even to the Amal’s presents. As for the house, we won’t
trouble her to lend it us longer than we can help. We intend shortly to
move into more extensive premises, and open business on a grander scale,
as the shopkeepers say,--eh, prince?’

‘Her money?--That money? God forgive her!’ answered Philammon. ‘Do you
fancy me base enough to touch it? But I am resolved. Tell me what to do,
and I will do it.’

‘You know the lane which runs down to the canal, under the left wall of
the house?’

‘Yes.’

‘And a door in the corner tower, close to the landing-place?’ ‘I do.’

‘Be there, with a dozen stout monks, to-morrow, an hour after sundown,
and take what we give you. After that, the concern is yours, not ours.’

‘Monks?’ said Philammon. ‘I am at open feud with the whole order.’

‘Make friends with them, then,’ shortly suggested Smid.

Philammon writhed inwardly. ‘It makes no difference to you, I presume,
whom I bring?’

‘No more than it does whether or not you pitch her into the canal, and
put a hurdle over her when you have got her,’ answered Smid; ‘which is
what a Goth would do, if he were in your place.’

‘Do not vex the poor lad, friend. If he thinks he can mend her instead
of punishing her, in Freya’s name, let him try. You will be there, then?
And mind, I like you. I liked you when you faced that great river-hog.
I like you better now than ever; for you have spoken to-day like a
Sagaman, and dared like a hero. Therefore mind; if you do not bring a
good guard to-morrow night, your life will not be safe. The whole city
is out in the streets; and Odin alone knows what will be done, and who
will be alive, eight-and-forty hours hence. Mind you!--The mob may do
strange things, and they may see still stranger things done. If you once
find yourself safe back here, stay where you are, if you value her life
or your own. And--if you are wise, let the men whom you bring with you
be monks, though it cost your proud stomach--’

‘That’s not fair, prince! You are telling too much!’ interrupted Smid,
while Philammon gulped down the said proud stomach, and answered, ‘Be it
so!’

‘I have won my bet, Smid,’ said the old man, chuckling, as the two
tramped out into the street, to the surprise and fear of all the
neighbours, while the children clapped their hands, and the street
dogs felt it their duty to bark lustily at the strange figures of their
unwonted visitors.

‘No play, no pay, Wulf. We shall see to-morrow.’

‘I knew that he would stand the trial! I knew he was right at heart!’

‘At all events, there is no fear of his ill-using the poor thing, if
he loves her well enough to go down on his knees to his sworn foes for
her.’

‘I don’t know that,’ answered Wulf, with a shake of the head. ‘These
monks, I hear, fancy that their God likes them the better the more
miserable they are: so, perhaps they may fancy that he will like them
all the more, the more miserable they make other people. However, it’s
no concern of ours.’

‘We have quite enough of our own to see to just now. But mind, no play,
no pay.’

‘Of course not. How the streets are filling! We shall not be able to see
the guards to-night, if this mob thickens much more.’

‘We shall have enough to do to hold our own, perhaps. Do you hear what
they are crying there? “Down with all heathens! Down with barbarians!”
 That means us, you know.’

‘Do you fancy no one understands Greek but yourself? Let them come ....
It may give us an excuse.... And we can hold the house a week.’

‘But how can we get speech of the guards?’

‘We will slip round by water. And, after all, deeds will win them better
than talk. They will be forced to fight on the same side as we, and most
probably be glad of our help; for if the mob attacks any one, it will
begin with the Prefect.’

‘And then--Curse their shouting! Let the soldiers once find our Amal
at their head, and they will be ready to go with him a mile, where they
meant to go a yard.’

‘The Goths will, and the Markmen, and those Dacians, and Thracians, or
whatever the Romans call them. But I hardly trust the Huns.’

‘The curse of heaven on their pudding faces and pigs’ eyes! There will
be no love lost between us. But there are not twenty of them scattered
in different troops; one of us can thrash three of them; and they will
be sure to side with the winning party. Besides, plunder, plunder,
comrade! When did you know a Hun turn back from that, even if he were
only on the scent of a lump of tallow?’

‘As for the Gauls and Latins,’.... went on Wulf meditatively, ‘they
belong to any man who can pay them.’....

‘Which we can do, like all wise generals, one penny out of our own
pocket, and nine out of the enemy’s. And the Amal is staunch?’

‘Staunch as his own hounds, now there is something to be done on the
spot. His heart was in the right place after all. I knew it all along.
But he could never in his life see four-and-twenty hours before him.
Even now if that Pelagia gets him under her spell again, he may throw
down his sword, and fall as fast asleep as ever.’

‘Never fear; we have settled her destiny for her, as far as that is
concerned. Look at the mob before the door! We must get in by the
postern-gate.’

‘Get in by the sewer, like a rat! I go my own way. Draw, old hammer and
tongs! or run away!’

‘Not this time.’ And sword in hand, the two marched into the heart of
the crowd, who gave way before them like a flock of sheep.

‘They know their intended shepherds already,’ said Smid. But at that
moment the crowd, seeing them about to enter the house, raised a yell of
‘Goths! Heathens! Barbarians!’ and a rush from behind took place.

‘If you will have it, then!’ said Wulf. And the two long bright blades
flashed round and round their heads, redder and redder every time they
swung aloft.... The old men never even checked their steady walk, and
knocking at the gate, went in, leaving more than one lifeless corpse at
the entrance.

‘We have put the coal in the thatch, now, with a vengeance,’ said Smid,
as they wiped their swords inside.

‘We have. Get me out a boat and half a dozen men, and I and Goderic will
go round by the canal to the palace, and settle a thing or two with the
guards.’

‘Why should not the Amal go, and offer our help himself to the Prefect?’

‘What? Would you have him after that turn against the hound? For troth
and honour’s sake, he must keep quiet in the matter.’

‘He will have no objection to keep quiet--trust him for that! But
don’t forget Sagaman Moneybag, the best of all orators,’ called Smid
laughingly after him, as he went off to man the boat.



CHAPTER XXV: SEEKING AFTER A SIGN


‘What answer has he sent back, father?’ asked Hypatia, as Theon
re-entered her chamber, after delivering that hapless letter to
Philammon.

‘Insolent that he is! he tore it to fragments and tied forth without a
word.’

‘Let him go, and desert us like the rest, in our calamity!’

‘At least, we have the jewels.’

‘The jewels? Let them be returned to their owner. Shall we defile
ourselves by taking them as wages for anything--above all, for that
which is unperformed?’

‘But, my child, they were given to us freely. He bade me keep
them; and--and, to tell you the truth, I must keep them. After this
unfortunate failure, be sure of it, every creditor we have will be
clamouring for payment.’

‘Let them take our house and furniture, and sell us as slaves, then. Let
them take all, provided we keep our virtue.’

‘Sell us as slaves? Are you mad?’

‘Not quite mad yet, father,’ answered she with a sad smile. ‘But how
should we be worse than we are now, were we slaves? Raphael Aben-Ezra
told me that he obeyed my precepts, when he went forth as a houseless
beggar; and shall I not have courage to obey them myself, if the need
come? The thought of his endurance has shamed my luxury for this many a
month. After all, what does the philosopher require but bread and
water, and the clear brook in which to wash away the daily stains of his
earthly prison-house? Let what is fated come. Hypatia struggles with the
stream no more!’

‘My daughter! And have you given up all hope? So soon disheartened!
What! Is this paltry accident to sweep away the purposes of years?
Orestes remains still faithful. His guards have orders to garrison the
house for as long as we shall require them.’

‘Send them away, then. I have done no wrong, and I fear no punishment.’

‘You do not know the madness of the mob; they are shouting your name in
the streets already, in company with Pelagia’s.’

Hypatia shuddered. Her name in company with Pelagia’s! And to this she
had brought herself!

‘I have deserved it! I have sold myself to a lie and a disgrace! I
have stooped to truckle, to intrigue! I have bound myself to a sordid
trickster! Father! never mention his name to me again! I have leagued
myself with the impure and the bloodthirsty, and I have my reward! No
more politics for Hypatia from henceforth, my father; no more orations
and lectures; no more pearls of Divine wisdom cast before swine. I have
sinned in divulging the secrets of the Immortals to the mob. Let them
follow their natures! Fool that I was, to fancy that my speech, my
plots, could raise them above that which the gods had made them!’

‘Then you give up our lectures? Worse and worse! We shall be ruined
utterly!’

‘We are ruined utterly already. Orestes? There is no help in him. I
know the man too well, my father, not to know that he would give us up
to-morrow to the fury of the Christians were his own base life--even his
own baser office--in danger.’

‘Too true--too true! I fear,’ said the poor old man, wringing his hands
in perplexity. ‘What will become of us,--of you, rather? What matter
what happens to the useless old star-gazer? Let him die! To-day or next
year is alike to him. But you, you! Let us escape by the canal. We may
gather up enough, even without these jewels, which you refuse, to pay
our voyage to Athens, and there we shall be safe with Plutarch; he
will welcome you--all Athens will welcome you--we will collect a fresh
school--and you shall be Queen of Athens, as you have been Queen of
Alexandria!’

‘No, father. What I know, henceforth I will know for myself only.
Hypatia will be from this day alone with the Immortal Gods!’

‘You will not leave me?’ cried the old man, terrified.

‘Never on earth!’ answered she, bursting into real human tears, and
throwing herself on his bosom. ‘Never--never! father of my spirit as
well as of my flesh!--the parent who has trained me, taught me, educated
my soul from the cradle to use her wings!--the only human being who
never misunderstood me--never thwarted me--never deceived me!’

‘My priceless child! And I have been the cause of your ruin!’

‘Not you!--a thousand times not you! I only am to blame! I tampered with
worldly politics. I tempted you on to fancy that I could effect what I
so rashly undertook. Do not accuse yourself unless you wish to break
my heart! We can be happy together yet.--A palm-leaf hut in the desert,
dates from the grove, and water from the spring--the monk dares be
miserable alone in such a dwelling, and cannot we dare to be happy
together in it?’

‘Then you will escape?’

‘Not to-day. It were base to flee before danger comes. We must hold
out at our post to the last moment, even if we dare not die at it like
heroes. And to-morrow I go to the lecture-room,--to the beloved Museum,
for the last time, to take farewell of my pupils. Unworthy as they are,
I owe it to myself and to philosophy to tell them why I leave them.’

‘It will be too dangerous--indeed it will!’

‘I could take the guards with me, then. And yet--no.... They shall never
have occasion to impute fear to the philosopher. Let them see her go
forth as usual on her errand, strong in the courage of innocence,
secure in the protection of the gods. So, perhaps, some sacred awe, some
suspicion of her divineness, may fall on them at last.’

‘I must go with you.’

‘No, I go alone. You might incur danger where I am safe. After all, I am
a woman.... And, fierce as they are, they will not dare to harm me.’

The old man shook his head.

‘Look now,’ she said smilingly, laying her hands on his shoulders, and
looking into his face.... ‘You tell me that I am beautiful, you know;
and beauty will tame the lion. Do you not think that this face might
disarm even a monk?’

And she laughed and blushed so sweetly, that the old man forgot his
fears, as she intended that he should, and kissed her and went his
way for the time being, to command all manner of hospitalities to the
soldiers, whom he prudently determined to keep in his house as long as
he could make them stay there; in pursuance of which wise purpose he
contrived not to see a great deal of pleasant flirtation between his
valiant defenders and Hypatia’s maids, who, by no means so prudish as
their mistress, welcomed as a rare boon from heaven an afternoon’s chat
with twenty tall men of war.

So they jested and laughed below, while old Theon, having brought out
the very best old wine, and actually proposed in person, by way of
mending matters, the health of the Emperor of Africa, locked himself
into the library, and comforted his troubled soul with a tough problem
of astronomy, which had been haunting him the whole day, even in the
theatre itself. But Hypatia sat still in her chamber, her face buried in
her hands, her heart full of many thoughts; her eyes of tears. She had
smiled away her father’s fears; she could not smile away her own.

She felt, she hardly knew why, but she felt as clearly as if a god had
proclaimed it to her bodily ears, that the crisis of her life was come:
that her political and active career was over, and that she must now be
content to be for herself, and in herself alone, all that she was, or
might become. The world might be regenerated: but not in her day;--the
gods restored; but not by her. It was a fearful discovery, and yet
hardly a discovery. Her heart had told her for years that she was hoping
against hope,--that she was struggling against a stream too mighty for
her. And now the moment had come when she must either be swept helpless
down the current, or, by one desperate effort, win firm land, and let
the tide roll on its own way henceforth.... Its own way?.... Not the
way of the gods, at least; for it was sweeping their names from off the
earth. What if they did not care to be known? What if they were weary of
worship and reverence from mortal men, and, self-sufficing in their own
perfect bliss, recked nothing for the weal or woe of earth? Must it not
be so? Had she not proof of it in everything which she beheld? What did
Isis care for her Alexandria? What did Athens care for her Athens?....
And yet Homer and Hesiod, and those old Orphic singers, were of another
mind.... Whence got they that strange fancy of gods counselling,
warring, intermarrying, with mankind, as with some kindred tribe?

‘Zeus, father of gods and men.’.... Those were words of hope and
comfort.... But were they true? Father of men? Impossible!--not father
of Pelagia, surely. Not father of the base, the foul, the ignorant....
Father of heroic souls, only, the poets must have meant.... But where
were the heroic souls now? Was she one? If so, why was she deserted by
the upper powers in her utter need? Was the heroic race indeed extinct?
Was she merely assuming, in her self-conceit, an honour to which she had
no claim? Or was it all a dream of these old singers? Had they, as some
bold philosophers had said, invented gods in their own likeness, and
palmed off on the awe and admiration of men their own fair phantoms?....
It must be so. If there were gods, to know them was the highest bliss
of man. Then would they not teach men of themselves, unveil their own
loveliness to a chosen few, even for the sake of their own honour, if
not, as she had dreamed once, from love to those who bore a kindred
flame to theirs?....What if there were no gods? What if the stream of
fate, which was sweeping away their names; were the only real power?
What if that old Pyrrhonic notion were the true solution of the problem
of the Universe? What if there were no centre, no order, no rest, no
goal--but only a perpetual flux, a down-rushing change? And before her
dizzying brain and heart arose that awful vision of Lucretius, of the
homeless Universe falling, falling, falling, for ever from nowhence
toward nowhither through the unending ages, by causeless and unceasing
gravitation, while the changes and efforts of all mortal things were but
the jostling of the dust-atoms amid the everlasting storm....

It could not be! There was a truth, a virtue, a beauty, a nobleness,
which could never change, but which were absolute, the same for ever.
The God-given instinct of her woman’s heart rebelled against her
intellect, and, in the name of God, denied its lie.... Yes,--there was
virtue, beauty.... And yet--might not they, too, be accidents of
that enchantment, which man calls mortal life; temporary and mutable
accidents of consciousness; brilliant sparks, struck out by the clashing
of the dust-atoms? Who could tell?

There were those once who could tell. Did not Plotinus speak of a direct
mystic intuition of the Deity, an enthusiasm without passion, a still
intoxication of the soul, in which she rose above life, thought, reason,
herself, to that which she contemplated, the absolute and first One,
and united herself with that One, or, rather, became aware of that union
which had existed from the first moment in which she emanated from
the One? Six times in a life of sixty years had Plotinus risen to that
height of mystic union, and known himself to be a part of God. Once had
Porphyry attained the same glory. Hypatia, though often attempting,
had never yet succeeded in attaining to any distinct vision of a being
external to herself; though practice, a firm will, and a powerful
imagination, had long since made her an adept in producing, almost
at will, that mysterious trance, which was the preliminary step to
supernatural vision. But her delight in the brilliant, and, as she
held, divine imaginations, in which at such times she revelled, had
been always checked and chilled by the knowledge that, in such matters,
hundreds inferior to her in intellect and in learning,--ay, saddest of
all, Christian monks and nuns, boasted themselves her equals,--indeed,
if their own account of their visions was to be believed, her
superiors--by the same methods which she employed. For by celibacy,
rigorous fasts, perfect bodily quiescence, and intense contemplation of
one thought, they, too, pretended to be able to rise above the body
into the heavenly regions, and to behold things unspeakable, which
nevertheless, like most other unspeakable things, contrived to be most
carefully detailed and noised abroad.... And it was with a half feeling
of shame that she prepared herself that afternoon for one more, perhaps
one last attempt, to scale the heavens, as she recollected how many
an illiterate monk and nun, from Constantinople to the Thebaid, was
probably employed at that moment exactly as she was. Still, the attempt
must be made. In that terrible abyss of doubt, she must have something
palpable, real; something beyond her own thoughts, and hopes, and
speculations, whereon to rest her weary faith, her weary heart....
Perhaps this time, at least, in her extremest need, a god might
vouchsafe some glimpse of his own beauty .... Athene might pity at
last.... Or, if not Athene, some archetype, angel, demon.... And then
she shuddered at the thought of those evil and deceiving spirits, whose
delight it was to delude and tempt the votaries of the gods, in the
forms of angels of light. But even in the face of that danger, she must
make the trial once again. Was she not pure and spotless as Athene’s
self? Would not her innate purity enable her to discern, by an
instinctive antipathy, those foul beings beneath the fairest mask? At
least, she must make the trial....

And so, with a look of intense humility, she began to lay aside her
jewels and her upper robes. Then, baring her bosom and her feet, and
shaking her golden tresses loose, she laid herself down upon the conch,
crossed her hands upon her breast, and, with upturned ecstatic eyes,
waited for that which might befall.

There she lay, hour after hour, as her eye gradually kindled, her bosom
heaved, her breath came fast: but there was no more sign of life
in those straight still limbs, and listless feet and hands, than in
Pygmalion’s ivory bride, before she bloomed into human flesh and blood.
The sun sank towards his rest; the roar of the city grew louder and
louder without; the soldiers revelled and laughed below: but every sound
passed through unconscious ears, and went its way unheeded. Faith, hope,
reason itself, were staked upon the result of that daring effort to
scale the highest heaven. And, by one continuous effort of her practised
will, which reached its highest virtue, as mystics hold, in its own
suicide, she chained down her senses from every sight and sound,
and even her mind from every thought, and lay utterly self-resigned,
self-emptied, till consciousness of time and place had vanished, and she
seemed to herself alone in the abyss.

She dared not reflect, she dared not hope, she dared not rejoice, lest
she should break the spell.... Again and again had she broken it at this
very point, by some sudden and tumultuous yielding to her own joy or
awe; but now her will held firm.... She did not feel her own limbs, hear
her own breath.... A light bright mist, an endless network of glittering
films, coming, going, uniting, resolving themselves, was above her
and around her.... Was she in the body or out of the body?....
...............

The network faded into an abyss of still clear light.... A still warm
atmosphere was around her, thrilling through and through her .... She
breathed the light, and floated in it, as a mote in the mid-day beam....
And still her will held firm. ...............

Far away, miles, and aeons, and abysses away, through the interminable
depths of glory, a dark and shadowy spot. It neared and grew.... A dark
globe, ringed with rainbows.... What might it be? She dared not hope....
It came nearer, nearer, nearer, touched her.... The centre quivered,
flickered, took form--a face. A god’s? No--Pelagia’s.

Beautiful, sad, craving, reproachful, indignant, awful.... Hypatia could
bear no more: and sprang to her feet with a shriek, to experience in
its full bitterness the fearful revulsion of the mystic, when the human
reason and will which he has spurned reassert their God-given rights;
and after the intoxication of the imagination, come its prostration and
collapse.

And this, then, was the answer of the gods! The phantom of her whom
she had despised, exposed, spurned from her! ‘No, not their answer--the
answer of my own soul! Fool that I have been! I have been exerting my
will most while I pretended to resign it most! I have been the slave
of every mental desire, while I tried to trample on them! What if that
network of light, that blaze, that globe of darkness, have been, like
the face of Pelagia, the phantoms of my own imagination--ay, even of
my own senses? What if I have mistaken for Deity my own self? What if I
have been my own light, my own abyss?.... Am I not my own abyss, my own
light--my own darkness?’ And she smiled bitterly as she said it, and
throwing herself again upon the couch, buried her head in her hands,
exhausted equally in body and in mind.

At last she rose, and sat, careless of her dishevelled locks, gazing
out into vacancy. ‘Oh for a sign, for a token! Oh for the golden days of
which the poets sang, when gods walked among men, fought by their side
as friends! And yet.... are these old stories credible, pious, even
modest? Does not my heart revolt from them? Who has shared more than I
in Plato’s contempt for the foul deeds, the degrading transformations,
which Homer imputes to the gods of Greece? Must I believe them now? Must
I stoop to think that gods, who live in a region above all sense, will
deign to make themselves palpable to those senses of ours which are
whole aeons of existence below them? Degrade themselves to the base
accidents of matter? Yes! That, rather than nothing!.... Be it even so.
Better, better, better, to believe that Ares fled shrieking and wounded
from a mortal man--better to believe in Zeus’s adulteries and Hermes’s
thefts--than to believe that gods have never spoken face to face with
men! Let me think, lest I go mad, that beings from that unseen world for
which I hunger have appeared, and held communion with mankind, such
as no reason or sense could doubt--even though those beings were more
capricious and baser than ourselves! Is there, after all, an unseen
world? Oh for a sign, a sign!’

Haggard and dizzy, she wandered into her ‘chamber of the gods’; a
collection of antiquities, which she kept there rather as matters of
taste than of worship. All around her they looked out into vacancy with
their white soulless eyeballs, their dead motionless beauty, those cold
dreams of the buried generations. Oh that they could speak, and set her
heart at rest! At the lower end of the room stood a Pallas, completely
armed with aegis, spear, and helmet; a gem of Athenian sculpture, which
she had bought from some merchants after the sack of Athens by the
Goths. There it stood severely fair; but the right hand, alas! was gone;
and there the maimed arm remained extended, as if in sad mockery of the
faith of which the body remained, while the power was dead and vanished.

She gazed long and passionately on the image of her favourite goddess,
the ideal to which she had longed for years to assimilate herself;
till--was it a dream? was it a frolic of the dying sunlight? or did
those lips really bend themselves into a smile?

Impossible! No, not impossible. Had not, only a few years before, the
image of Hecate smiled on a philosopher? Were there not stories of
moving images, and winking pictures, and all the material miracles by
which a dying faith strives desperately--not to deceive others--but to
persuade itself of its own sanity? It had been--it might be--it was--!

No! there the lips were, as they had been from the beginning, closed
upon each other in that stony self-collected calm, which was only not a
sneer. The wonder, if it was one, had passed: and now--did her eyes play
her false, or were the snakes round that Medusa’s head upon the shield
all writhing, grinning, glaring at her with stony eyes, longing to
stiffen her with terror into their own likeness?

No! that, too, passed. Would that even it had stayed, for it would
have been a sign of life! She looked up at the face once more: but in
vain--the stone was stone; and ere she was aware, she found herself
clasping passionately the knees of the marble.

‘Athene! Pallas! Adored! Ever Virgin! Absolute reason, springing
unbegotten from the nameless One! Hear me! Athene! Have mercy on me!
Speak, if it be to curse me! Thou who alone wieldest the lightnings
of thy father, wield them to strike me dead, if thou wilt; only do
something!--something to prove thine own existence--something to make
me sure that anything exists beside this gross miserable matter, and my
miserable soul. I stand alone in the centre of the universe! I fall and
sicken down the abyss of ignorance, and doubt, and boundless blank
and darkness! Oh, have mercy! I know that thou art not this! Thou art
everywhere and in all things! But I know that this is a form which
pleases thee, which symbolises thy nobleness! T know that thou hast
deigned to speak to those who--Oh! what do I know? Nothing! nothing!
nothing!

And she clung there, bedewing with scalding tears the cold feet of the
image, while there was neither sign, nor voice, nor any that answered.

On a sudden she was startled by a rustling near; and, looking round, saw
close behind her the old Jewess.

‘Cry aloud!’ hissed the hag, in a tone of bitter scorn; ‘cry aloud, for
she is a goddess. Either she is talking, or pursuing, or she is on a
journey; or perhaps she has grown old, as we all shall do some day, my
pretty lady, and is too cross and lazy to stir. What! her naughty doll
will not speak to her, will it not? or even open its eyes, because the
wires are grown rusty? Well, we will find a new doll for her, if she
chooses.’

‘Begone, hag! What do you mean by intruding here?’ said Hypatia,
springing up; but the old woman went on coolly--

‘Why not try the fair young gentleman over there?’ pointing to a copy
of the Apollo which we call Belvedere--‘What is his name? Old maids are
always cross and jealous, you know. But he--he could not be cruel to
such a sweet face as that. Try the fair young lad! Or, perhaps, if you
are bashful, the old Jewess might try him for you?’

These last words were spoken with so marked a significance, that
Hypatia, in spite of her disgust, found herself asking the hag what
she meant. She made no answer for a few seconds, but remained looking
steadily into her eyes with a glance of fire, before which even the
proud Hypatia, as she had done once before, quailed utterly, so deep was
the understanding, so dogged the purpose, so fearless the power, which
burned within those withered and shrunken sockets.

‘Shall the old witch call him up, the fair young Apollo, with the
beauty-bloom upon his chin? He shall come! He shall come! I warrant him
he must come, civilly enough, when old Miriam’s finger is once held up.’

‘To you? Apollo, the god of light, obey a Jewess?’

‘A Jewess? And you a Greek?’ almost yelled the old woman. ‘And who
are you who ask? And who are your gods, your heroes, your devils,
you children of yesterday, compared with us? You, who were a set of
half-naked savages squabbling about the siege of Troy, when our
Solomon, amid splendours such as Rome and Constantinople never saw, was
controlling demons and ghosts, angels and archangels, principalities and
powers, by the ineffable name? What science have you that you have not
stolen from the Egyptians and Chaldees? And what had the Egyptians which
Moses did not teach them? And what have the Chaldees which Daniel did
not teach them? What does the world know but from us, the fathers
and the masters of magic--us, the lords of the inner secrets of the
universe! Come, you Greek baby--as the priests in Egypt said of your
forefathers, always children, craving for a new toy, and throwing it
away next day--come to the fountainhead of all your paltry wisdom! Name
what you will see, and you shall see it!’

Hypatia was cowed; for of one thing there was no doubt,--that the woman
utterly believed her own words; and that was a state of mind of which
she had seen so little, that it was no wonder if it acted on her with
that overpowering sympathetic force, with which it generally does, and
perhaps ought to, act on the human heart. Besides, her school had always
looked to the ancient nations of the East for the primeval founts of
inspiration, the mysterious lore of mightier races long gone by. Might
she not have found it now?

The Jewess saw her advantage in a moment, and ran on, without giving her
time to answer--

‘What sort shall it be, then? By glass and water, or by the moonlight
on the wall, or by the sieve, or by the meal? By the cymbals, or by the
stars? By the table of the twenty-four elements, by which the Empire
was promised to Theodosius the Great, or by the sacred counters of the
Assyrians, or by the sapphire of the Hecatic sphere? Shall I threaten,
as the Egyptian priests used to do, to tear Osiris again in pieces, or
to divulge the mysteries of Isis? I could do so, if I chose; for I know
them all and more. Or shall I use the ineffable name on Solomon’s seal,
which we alone, of all the nations of the earth, know? No; it would be a
pity to waste that upon a heathen. It shall be by the sacred wafer. Look
here!--here they are, the wonder-working atomies! Eat no food this day,
except one of these every three hours, and come to me to-night at the
house of your porter, Eudaimon, bringing with you the black agate; and
then--why then, what you have the heart to see, you shall see!’

Hypatia took the wafers, hesitating--

‘But what are they?’

‘And you profess to explain Homer? Whom did I hear the other morning
lecturing away so glibly on the nepenthe which Helen gave the heroes, to
fill them with the spirit of joy and love; how it was an allegory of
the inward inspiration which flows from spiritual beauty, and all
that?--pretty enough, fair lady; but the question still remains, what
was it? and I say it was this. Take it and try; and then confess, that
while you can talk about Helen, I can act her; and know a little more
about Homer than you do, after all.’

‘I cannot believe you! Give me some sign of your power, or how can I
trust you?’

‘A sign?--A sign? Kneel down then there, with your face toward the
north; you are over tall for the poor old cripple.’

‘I? I never knelt to human being.’

‘Then consider that you kneel to the handsome idol there, if you
will--but kneel!’

And, constrained by that glittering eye, Hypatia knelt before her.

‘Have you faith? Have you desire? Will you submit? Will you obey?
Self-will and pride see nothing, know nothing. If you do not give up
yourself, neither God nor devil will care to approach. Do you submit?’

‘I do! I do!’ cried poor Hypatia, in an agony of curiosity and
self-distrust, while she felt her eye quailing and her limbs loosening
more and more every moment under that intolerable fascination.

The old woman drew from her bosom a crystal, and placed the point
against Hypatia’s breast. A cold shiver ran through her.... The witch
waved her hands mysteriously round her head, muttering from time to
time, ‘Down! down, proud spirit!’ and then placed the tips of her skinny
fingers on the victim’s forehead. Gradually her eyelids became heavy;
again and again she tried to raise them, and dropped them again
before those fixed glaring eyes...., and in another moment she lost
consciousness....

When she awoke, she was kneeling in a distant part of the room, with
dishevelled hair and garments. What was it so cold that she was clasping
in her arms? The feet of the Apollo! The hag stood by her, chuckling to
herself and clapping her hands.

‘How came I here? What have I been doing?’

‘Saying such pretty things!--paying the fair youth there such
compliments, as he will not be rude enough to forget in his visit
to-night. A charming prophetic trance you have had! Ah ha! you are not
the only woman who is wiser asleep than awake! Well, you will make a
very pretty Cassandra-or a Clytia, if you have the sense.... It lies
with you, my fair lady. Are you satisfied now? Will you have any more
signs? Shall the old Jewess blast those blue eyes blind to show that she
knows more than the heathen?’

‘Oh, I believe you--I believe,’ cried the poor exhausted maiden. ‘I will
come; and yet--’

‘Ah! yes! You had better settle first how he shall appear.’

‘As he wills!--let him only come! only let me know that he is a god.
Abamnon said that gods appeared in a clear, steady, unbearable light,
amid a choir of all the lesser deities, archangels, principalities, and
heroes, who derive their life from them.’

‘Abamnon was an old fool, then. Do you think young Phoebus ran after
Daphne with such a mob at his heels? or that Jove, when he swam up to
Leda, headed a whole Nile-flock of ducks, and plover, and curlews? No,
he shall come alone--to you alone; and then you may choose for yourself
between Cassandra and Clytia.... Farewell. Do not forget your wafers,
or the agate either, and talk with no one between now and sunset. And
then--my pretty lady!’

And laughing to herself, the old hag glided from the room.

Hypatia sat trembling with shame and dread. She, as a disciple of the
more purely spiritualistic school of Porphyry, had always looked with
aversion, with all but contempt, on those theurgic arts which were so
much lauded and employed by Iamblicus, Abamnon, and those who clung
lovingly to the old priestly rites of Egypt and Chaldaea. They had
seemed to her vulgar toys, tricks of legerdemain, suited only for the
wonder of the mob.... She began to think of them with more favour now.
How did she know that the vulgar did not require signs and wonders to
make them believe?.... How, indeed? for did she not want such herself?
And she opened Abamnon’s famous letter to Porphyry, and read earnestly
over, for the twentieth time, his subtle justification of magic, and
felt it to be unanswerable. Magic? What was not magical? The whole
universe, from the planets over her head to the meanest pebble at her
feet, was utterly mysterious, ineffable, miraculous, influencing and
influenced by affinities and repulsions as unexpected, as unfathomable,
as those which, as Abamnon said, drew the gods towards those sounds,
those objects, which, either in form, or colour, or chemical properties,
were symbolic of, or akin to, themselves. What wonder in it, after
all? Was not love and hatred, sympathy and antipathy, the law of the
universe? Philosophers, when they gave mechanical explanations of
natural phenomena, came no nearer to the real solution of them. The
mysterious ‘Why?’ remained untouched.... All their analyses could only
darken with big words the plain fact that the water hated the oil
with which it refused to mix, the lime loved the acid which it eagerly
received into itself, and, like a lover, grew warm with the rapture of
affection. Why not? What right had we to deny sensation, emotion, to
them, any more than to ourselves? Was not the same universal spirit
stirring in them as in us? And was it not by virtue of that spirit that
we thought, and felt, and loved?--Then why not they, as well as we?
If the one spirit permeated all things, if its all-energising presence
linked the flower with the crystal as well as with the demon and the
god, must it not link together also the two extremes of the great chain
of being? bind even the nameless One itself to the smallest creature
which bore its creative impress? What greater miracle in the attraction
of a god or an angel, by material incense, symbols, and spells, than
in the attraction of one soul to another by the material sounds of the
human voice? Was the affinity between spirit and matter implied in that,
more miraculous than the affinity between the soul and the body?--than
the retention of that soul within that body by the breathing of material
air, the eating of material food? Or even, if the physicists were right,
and the soul were but a material product or energy of the nerves, and
the sole law of the universe the laws of matter, then was not magic
even more probable, more rational? Was it not fair by every analogy
to suppose that there might be other, higher beings than ourselves,
obedient to those laws, and therefore possible to be attracted, even as
human beings were, by the baits of material sights and sounds?.... If
spirit pervaded all things, then was magic probable; if nothing but
matter had existence, magic was morally certain. All that remained in
either case was the test of experience.... And had not that test been
applied in every age, and asserted to succeed? What more rational, more
philosophic action than to try herself those methods and ceremonies
which she was assured on every hand had never failed but through the
ignorance or unfitness of the neophyte?.... Abamnon must be right....
She dared not think him wrong; for if this last hope failed, what was
there left but to eat and drink, for to-morrow we die?



CHAPTER XXVI: MIRIAM’S PLOT


He who has worshipped a woman, even against his will and conscience,
knows well how storm may follow storm, and earthquake earthquake, before
his idol be utterly overthrown. And so Philammon found that evening,
as he sat pondering over the strange chances of the day; for, as he
pondered, his old feelings towards Hypatia began, in spite of the
struggles of his conscience and reason, to revive within him. Not only
pure love of her great loveliness, the righteous instinct which bids us
welcome and honour beauty, whether in man or woman, as something of
real worth--divine, heavenly, ay, though we know not how, in a most deep
sense eternal; which makes our reason give the lie to all merely logical
and sentimental maunderings of moralists about ‘the fleeting hues of
this our painted clay’; telling men, as the old Hebrew Scriptures tell
them, that physical beauty is the deepest of all spiritual symbols;
and that though beauty without discretion be the jewel of gold in the
swine’s snout, yet the jewel of gold it is still, the sacrament of an
inward beauty, which ought to be, perhaps hereafter may be, fulfilled
in spirit and in truth. Not only this, which whispered to him--and
who shall say that the whisper was of the earth, or of the lower
world?--‘She is too beautiful to be utterly evil’; but the very defect
in her creed which he had just discovered, drew him towards her again.
She had no Gospel for the Magdalene, because she was a Pagan.... That,
then, was the fault of her Paganism, not of herself. She felt for
Pelagia, but even if she had not, was not that, too, the fault of her
Paganism? And for that Paganism who was to be blamed? She?.... Was
he the man to affirm that? Had he not seen scandals, stupidities,
brutalities, enough to shake even his faith, educated a Christian? How
much more excuse for her, more delicate, more acute, more lofty than he;
the child, too of a heathen father? Her perfections, were they not
her own?--her defects, those of her circumstances?.... And had she not
welcomed him, guarded him, taught him, honoured him?.... Could he turn
against her? above all now in her distress--perhaps her danger? Was he
not bound to her, if by nothing else, by gratitude? Was not he, of all
men, bound to believe that all she required to make her perfect was
conversion to the true faith?.... And that first dream of converting her
arose almost as bright as ever.... Then he was checked by the thought
of his first utter failure.... At least, if he could not convert her, he
could love her, pray for her.... No, he could not even do that; for to
whom could he pray? He had to repent, to be forgiven, to humble himself
by penitence, perhaps for years, ere he could hope to be heard even for
himself, much less for another.... And so backwards and forwards swayed
his hope and purpose, till he was roused from his meditation by the
voice of the little porter summoning him to his evening meal; and
recollecting, for the first time, that he had tasted no food that day,
he went down, half-unwillingly, and ate.

But as he, the porter, and his negro wife were sitting silently and
sadly enough together, Miriam came in, apparently in high good humour,
and lingered a moment on her way to her own apartments upstairs.

‘Eh? At supper? And nothing but lentils and water-melons, when the
flesh-pots of Egypt have been famous any time these two thousand years.
Ah! but times are changed since then!.... You have worn out the old
Hebrew hints, you miserable Gentiles, you, and got a Caesar instead of
a Joseph! Hist, you hussies!’ cried she to the girls upstairs, clapping
her hands loudly. ‘Here! bring us down one of those roast chickens,
and a bottle of the wine of wines--the wine with the green seal, you
careless daughters of Midian, you, with your wits running on the men,
I’ll warrant, every minute I’ve been out of the house! Ah, you’ll smart
for it some day--you’ll smart for it some day, you daughters of Adam’s
first wife!’

Down came, by the hands of one of the Syrian slave-girls, the fowl and
the wine.

‘There, now; we’ll all sup together. Wine, that maketh glad the heart of
man!--Youth, you were a monk once, so you have read all about that, eh?
and about the best wine which goes down sweetly, causing the lips of
them that are asleep to speak. And rare wine it was, I warrant, which
the blessed Solomon had in his little country cellar up there in
Lebanon. We’ll try if this is not a very fair substitute for it, though.
Come, my little man-monkey, drink, and forget your sorrow! You shall
be temple-sweeper to Beelzebub yet, I promise you. Look at it there,
creaming and curdling, the darling! purring like a cat at the very
thought of touching human lips! As sweet as honey, as strong as fire, as
clear as amber! Drink, ye children of Gehenna; and make good use of the
little time that is left you between this and the unquenchable fire!’

And tossing a cup of it down her own throat, as if it had been water,
she watched her companions with a meaning look, as they drank.

The little porter followed her example gallantly. Philammon looked, and
longed, and sipped blushingly and bashfully, and tried to fancy that he
did not care for it; and sipped again, being willing enough to forget
his sorrow also for a moment; the negress refused with fear and
trembling--‘She had a vow on her.’

‘Satan possess you and your vow! Drink, you coal out of Tophet! Do you
think it is poisoned? You, the only creature in the world that I should
not enjoy ill-using, because every one else ill-uses you already without
my help! Drink, I say, or I’ll turn you pea-green from head to foot!’


The negress put the cup to her lips, and contrived, for her own reasons,
to spill the contents unobserved.

‘A very fine lecture that of the Lady Hypatia’s the other morning, on
Helen’s nepenthe,’ quoth the little porter, growing philosophic as
the wine-fumes rose. ‘Such a power of extracting the cold water of
philosophy out of the bottomless pit of Mythus, I never did hear. Did
you ever, my Philammonidion?’

‘Aha! she and I were talking about that half an hour ago,’ said Miriam.

‘What! have you seen her?’ asked Philammon, with a flutter of the heart.

‘If you mean, did she mention you,--why, then, yes!’

‘How?--how?’

‘Talked of a young Phoebus Apollo--without mentioning names, certainly,
but in the most sensible, and practical, and hopeful way--the wisest
speech that I have heard from her this twelvemonth.’

Philammon blushed scarlet.

‘And that,’ thought he, in spite of what passed this morning!--Why’ what
is the matter with our host?’

‘He has taken Solomon’s advice, and forgotten his sorrow.’

And so, indeed, he had; for he was sleeping sweetly, with open
lack-lustre eyes, and a maudlin smile at the ceiling; while the negress,
with her head fallen on her chest, seemed equally unconscious of their
presence.

‘We’ll see,’ quoth Miriam; and taking up the lamp, she held the flame
unceremoniously to the arm of each of them; but neither winced nor
stirred.

‘Surely your wine is not drugged?’ said Philammon, in trepidation.

‘Why not? What has made them beasts, may make us angels. You seem none
the less lively for it! Do I?’

‘But drugged wine?’

‘Why not? The same who made wine made poppy-juice. Both will make man
happy. Why not use both?’

‘It is poison!’

‘It is the nepenthe, as I told Hypatia, whereof she was twaddling
mysticism this morning. Drink, child, drink! I have no mind to put
you to sleep to-night! I want to make a man of you, or rather, to see
whether you are one!’

And she drained another cup, and then went on, half talking to herself--

‘Ay, it is poison; and music is poison; and woman is poison, according
to the new creed, Pagan and Christian; and wine will be poison, and
meat will be poison, some day; and we shall have a world full of mad
Nebuchadnezzars, eating grass like oxen. It is poisonous, and brutal,
and devilish, to be a man, and not a monk, and an eunuch, and a dry
branch. You are all in the same lie, Christians and philosophers, Cyril
and Hypatia! Don’t interrupt me, but drink, young fool!--Ay, and the
only man who keeps his manhood, the only man who is not ashamed to be
what God has made him, is your Jew. You will find yourselves in want
of him after all, some day, you besotted Gentiles, to bring you back
to common sense and common manhood.--In want of him and his grand old
books, which you despise while you make idols of them, about Abraham,
and Jacob, and Moses, and David, and Solomon, whom you call saints, you
miserable hypocrites, though they did what you are too dainty to do,
and had their wives and their children, and thanked God for a beautiful
woman, as Adam did before them, and their sons do after them--Drink, I
say--and believed that God had really made the world, and not the devil,
and had given them the lordship over it, as you will find out to your
cost some day.’

Philammon heard, and could not answer; and on she rambled.

‘And music, too? Our priests were not afraid of sackbut and psaltery,
dulcimer and trumpet, in the house of the Lord; for they knew who had
given them the cunning to make them. Our prophets were not afraid of
calling for music, when they wished to prophesy, and letting it soften
and raise their souls, and open and quicken them till they saw into the
inner harmony of things, and beheld the future in the present; for they
knew who made the melody and harmony, and made them the outward symbols
of the inward song which runs through sun and stars, storm and tempest,
fulfilling his word--in that these sham philosophers the heathen are
wiser than those Christian monks. Try it!--try it! Come with me! Leave
these sleepers here, and come to my rooms. You long to be as wise as
Solomon. Then get at wisdom as Solomon did, and give your heart first to
know folly and madness.... You have read the Book of the Preacher?’

Poor Philammon! He was no longer master of himself. The arguments--the
wine--the terrible spell of the old woman’s voice and eye, and the
strong overpowering will which showed out through them, dragged him
along in spite of himself. As if in a dream, he followed her up the
stairs.

‘There, throw away that stupid, ugly, shapeless philosopher’s cloak.
So! You have on the white tunic I gave you? And now you look as a human
being should. And you have been to the baths to-day? Well--you have the
comfort of feeling now like other people, and having that alabaster skin
as white as it was created, instead of being tanned like a brute’s hide.
Drink, I say! Ay--what was that face, that figure, made for? Bring a
mirror here, hussy! There, look in that and judge for yourself? Were
those lips rounded for nothing? Why were those eyes set in your head,
and made to sparkle bright as jewels, sweet as mountain honey? Why were
those curls laid ready for soft fingers to twine themselves among
them, and look all the whiter among the glossy black knots? Judge for
yourself!’

Alas! poor Philammon!

‘And after all,’ thought he, ‘is it not true, as well as pleasant?’

‘Sing to the poor boy, girls!--sing to him! and teach him for the first
time in his little ignorant life, the old road to inspiration!’

One of the slave-girls sat down on the divan, and took up a double
flute; while the other rose, and accompanying the plaintive dreamy air
with a slow dance, and delicate twinklings of her silver armlets and
anklets, and the sistrum which she held aloft, she floated gracefully
round and round the floor and sang--

Why were we born but for bliss? Why are we ripe, but to fall? Dream
not that duty can bar thee from beauty, Like water and sunshine, the
heirloom of all.

Lips were made only to kiss; Hands were made only to toy; Eyes were made
only to lure on the lonely, The longing, the loving, and drown them in
joy!

Alas, for poor Philammon! And yet no! The very poison brought with it
its own anti-dote; and, shaking off by one strong effort of will the
spell of the music and the wine, he sprang to his feet....

‘Never! If love means no more than that--if it is to be a mere delicate
self-indulgence, worse than the brute’s, because it requires the
prostration of nobler faculties, and a selfishness the more huge in
proportion to the greatness of the soul which is crushed inward by
it--then I will have none of it! I have had my dream--yes! but it was
of one who should be at once my teacher and my pupil, my debtor and my
queen--who should lean on me, and yet support me--supply my defects,
although with lesser light, as the old moon fills up the circle of the
new--labour with me side by side in some great work--rising with me for
ever as I rose: and this is the base substitute! Never!’

Whether or not this was unconsciously forced into words by the vehemence
of his passion, or whether the old Jewess heard, or pretended to hear, a
footstep coming up the stair, she at all events sprang instantly to her
feet.

‘Hist! Silence, girls! I hear a visitor. What mad maiden has come to beg
a love-charm of the poor old witch at this time of night? Or have the
Christian bloodhounds tracked the old lioness of Judah to her den at
last? We’ll see!’

And she drew a dagger from her girdle, and stepped boldly to the door.
As she went out she turned--

‘So! my brave young Apollo! You do not admire simple woman? You must
have something more learned and intellectual and spiritual, and so
forth. I wonder whether Eve, when she came to Adam in the garden,
brought with her a certificate of proficiency in the seven sciences?
Well, well--like must after like. Perhaps we shall be able to suit you
after all. Vanish, daughters of Midian!’

The girls vanished accordingly, whispering and laughing; and Philammon
found himself alone. Although he was somewhat soothed by the old woman’s
last speech, yet a sense of terror, of danger, of coming temptation,
kept him standing sternly on his feet, looking warily round the chamber,
lest a fresh siren should emerge from behind some curtain or heap of
pillows.

On one side of the room he perceived a doorway, filled by a curtain of
gauze, from behind which came the sound of whispering voices. His fear,
growing with the general excitement of his mind, rose into anger as he
began to suspect some snare; and he faced round towards the curtain, and
stood like a wild beast at bay, ready, with uplifted arm, for all evil
spirits, male or female.

‘And he will show himself? How shall I accost him?’ whispered a
well-known voice--could it be Hypatia’s? And then the guttural Hebrew
accent of the old woman answered-- ‘As you spoke of him this morning--’

‘Oh! I will tell him all, and he must--he must have mercy! But he?--so
awful, so glorious!--’

What the answer was, he could not hear but the next moment a sweet
heavy scent, as of narcotic gums, filled the room--mutterings of
incantations--and then a blaze of light, in which the curtain vanished,
and disclosed to his astonished eyes, enveloped in a glory of luminous
smoke, the hag standing by a tripod, and, kneeling by her, Hypatia
herself, robed in pure white, glittering with diamonds and gold, her
lips parted, her head thrown back, her arms stretched out in an agony of
expectation.

In an instant, before he had time to stir, she had sprung through the
blaze, and was kneeling at his feet.

‘Phoebus! beautiful, glorious, ever young! Hear me! only a moment! only
this once!’

Her drapery had caught fire from the tripod, but she did not heed it.
Philammon instinctively clasped her in his arms, and crushed it out, as
she cried--

‘Have mercy on me! Tell me the secret! I will obey thee! I have no
self--I am thy slave! Kill me, if thou wilt: but speak!’

The blaze sank into a soft, warm, mellow gleam, and beyond it what
appeared?

The negro-woman, with one finger upon her lips, as with an imploring,
all but despairing look, she held up to him her little crucifix.

He saw it. What thoughts flashed through him, like the lightning bolt,
at that blessed sign of infinite self-sacrifice, I say not; let those
who know it judge for themselves. But in another instant he had spurned
from him the poor deluded maiden, whose idolatrous ecstasies he saw
instantly were not meant for himself, and rushed desperately across the
room, looking for an outlet.

He found a door in the darkness--a room-a window--and in another moment
he had leapt twenty feet into the street, rolled over, bruised and
bleeding, rose again like an Antaeus, with new strength, and darted off
towards the archbishop’s house.

And poor Hypatia lay half senseless on the floor, with the Jewess
watching her bitter tears--not merely of disappointment, but of utter
shame. For as Philammon fled she had recognised those well-known
features; and the veil was lifted from her eyes, and the hope and the
self-respect of Theon’s daughter were gone for ever.

Her righteous wrath was too deep for upbraidings. Slowly she rose;
returned into the inner room; wrapped her cloak deliberately around her;
and went silently away, with one look at the Jewess of solemn scorn and
defiance.

‘Ah! I can afford a few sulky looks to-night!’ said the old woman to
herself, with a smile, as she picked up from the floor the prize for
which she had been plotting so long--Raphael’s half of the black agate.

‘I wonder whether she will miss it! Perhaps she will have no fancy for
its company any longer, now that she has discovered what over-palpable
archangels appear when she rubs it. But if she does try to recover
it.... why--let her try her strength with mine--or, rather, with a
Christian mob.’

And then, drawing from her bosom the other half of the talisman, she
fitted the two pieces together again and again, fingering them over, and
poring upon them with tear-brimming eyes, till she had satisfied herself
that the fracture still fitted exactly; while she murmured to herself
from time to time--‘Oh, that he were here! Oh, that he would return
now--now! It may be too late to-morrow! Stay--I will go and consult the
teraph; it may know where he is....’

And she departed to her incantations; while Hypatia threw herself upon
her bed at home, and filled the chamber with a long, low wailing, as
of a child in pain, until the dreary dawn broke on her shame and her
despair. And then she rose, and rousing herself for one great effort,
calmly prepared a last oration, in which she intended to bid farewell
for ever to Alexandria and to the schools.

Philammon meanwhile was striding desperately up the main street which
led towards the Serapeium. But he was not destined to arrive there as
soon as he had hoped to do. For ere he had gone half a mile, behold a
crowd advancing towards him blocking up the whole street.

The mass seemed endless. Thousands of torches flared above their heads,
and from the heart of the procession rose a solemn chant, in which
Philammon soon recognised a well-known Catholic hymn. He was half minded
to turn up some by-street, and escape meeting them. But on attempting
to do so, he found every avenue which he tried similarly blocked up by a
tributary stream of people; and, almost ere he was aware, was entangled
in the vanguard of the great column.

‘Let me pass!’ cried he in a voice of entreaty.

‘Pass, thou heathen?’

In vain he protested his Christianity.

‘Origenist, Donatist, heretic! Whither should a good Catholic be going
to-night, save to the Caesareum?’

‘My friends, my friends, I have no business at the Caesareum!’ cried he,
in utter despair. ‘I am on my way to seek a private interview with the
patriarch, on matters of importance.’

‘Oh, liar! who pretends to be known to the patriarch, and yet is
ignorant that this night he visits at the Caesareum the most sacred
corpse of the martyr Ammonius!’

‘What! Is Cyril with you?’

‘He and all his clergy.’

‘Better so; better in public,’ said Philammon to himself; and, turning,
he joined the crowd.

Onward, with chant and dirge, they swept out through the Sun-gate, upon
the harbour esplanade, and wheeled to the right along the quay, while
the torchlight bathed in a red glare the great front of the Caesareum,
and the tall obelisks before it, and the masts of the thousand ships
which lay in the harbour on their left; and last, but not least, before
the huge dim mass of the palace which bounded the esplanade in front,
a long line of glittering helmets and cuirasses, behind a barrier of
cables which stretched from the shore to the corner of the museum.

There was a sudden halt; a low ominous growl; and then the mob pressed
onward from behind, surged up almost to the barrier. The soldiers
dropped the points of their lances, and stood firm. Again the mob
recoiled; again surged forward. Fierce cries arose; some of the boldest
stooped to pick up stones: but, luckily, the pavement was too firm for
them....Another moment, and the whole soldiery of Alexandria would have
been fighting for life and death against fifty thousand Christians....

But Cyril had not forgotten his generalship. Reckless as that night’s
events proved him to be about arousing the passions of his subjects, he
was yet far too wary to risk the odium and the danger of a night attack,
which, even if successful, would have cost the lives of hundreds. He
knew well enough the numbers and the courage of the enemy, and the
certainty that, in case of a collision, no quarter would be given or
accepted on either side.... Beside, if a battle must take place--and
that, of course, must happen sooner or later--it must not happen in his
presence and under his sanction. He was in the right now, and Orestes in
the wrong; and in the right he would keep--at least till his express
to Byzantium should have returned, and Orestes was either proscribed
or superseded. So looking forward to some such chance as this, the wary
prelate had schooled his aides-de-camp, the deacons of the city, and
went on his way up the steps of the Caesareum, knowing that they could
be trusted to keep the peace outside.

And they did their work well. Before a blow had been struck, or even an
insult passed on either side, they had burst through the front rank
of the mob, and by stout threats of excommunication, enjoined not only
peace, but absolute silence until the sacred ceremony which was about to
take place should be completed; and enforced their commands by marching
up and down like sentries between the hostile ranks for the next
weary two hours, till the very soldiers broke out into expressions of
admiration, and the tribune of the cohort, who ad no great objection,
but also no great wish, fight, paid them a high-flown compliment on
their laudable endeavours to maintain public order, and received the
somewhat ambiguous reply, that the ‘weapons of their warfare were not
carnal, that they wrestled not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities and powers,’.... an answer which the tribune, being now
somewhat sleepy, thought it best to leave unexplained.

In the meanwhile, there had passed up the steps of the Temple a gorgeous
line of priests, among whom glittered, more gorgeous than all, the
stately figure of the pontiff. They were followed close by thousands of
monks, not only from Alexandria and Nitria, but from all the adjoining
towns and monasteries. And as Philammon, unable for some half hour more
to force his way into the church, watched their endless stream, he could
well believe the boast which he had so often heard in Alexandria, that
one half of the population of Egypt was at that moment in ‘religious
orders.’

After the monks, the laity began to enter but even then so vast was the
crowd, and so dense the crush upon the steps, that before he could force
his way into the church, Cyril’s sermon had begun. ...............

--‘What went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Nay, such
are in kings’ palaces, and in the palaces of prefects who would needs
be emperors, and cast away the Lord’s bonds from them--of whom it is
written, that He that sitteth in the heavens laugheth them to scorn, and
taketh the wicked in their own snare, and maketh the devices of princes
of none effect. Ay, in king’s palaces, and in theatres too, where the
rich of this world, poor in faith, deny their covenant, and defile their
baptismal robes that they may do honour to the devourers of the earth.
Woe to them who think that they may partake of the cup of the Lord
and the cup of devils. Woe to them who will praise with the same mouth
Aphrodite the fiend, and her of whom it is written that He was born of
a pure Virgin. Let such be excommunicate from the cup of the Lord, and
from the congregation of the Lord, till they have purged away their sins
by penance and by almsgiving. But for you, ye poor of this world, rich
in faith, you whom the rich despise, hale before the judgment seats, and
blaspheme that holy name whereby ye are called--what went ye out into
the wilderness to see? A prophet?--Ay, and more than a prophet--a
martyr! More than a prophet, more than a king, more than a prefect whose
theatre was the sands of the desert, whose throne was the cross, whose
crown was bestowed, not by heathen philosophers and daughters of
Satan, deceiving men with the works of their fathers, but by angels and
archangels; a crown of glory, the victor’s laurel, which grows for ever
in the paradise of the highest heaven. Call him no more Ammonius, call
him Thaumasius, wonderful! Wonderful in his poverty, wonderful in his
zeal, wonderful in his faith, wonderful in his fortitude, wonderful
in his death, most wonderful in the manner of that death. Oh thrice
blessed, who has merited the honour of the cross itself! What can
follow, but that one so honoured in the flesh should also be honoured
in the life which he now lives, and that from the virtue of these
thrice-holy limbs the leper should be cleansed, the dumb should speak,
the very dead be raised? Yes; it were impiety to doubt it. Consecrated
by the cross, this flesh shall not only rest in hope but work in power.
Approach, and be healed! Approach, and see the glory of the saints, the
glory of the poor. Approach, and learn that that which man despises,
God hath highly esteemed; that that which man rejects, God accepts; that
that which man punishes, God rewards. Approach, and see how God hath
chosen the foolish things of this world to confound the wise, and the
weak things of this world to confound the strong. Man abhors the cross:
The Son of God condescended to endure it! Man tramples on the poor: The
Son of God hath not where to lay His head. Man passes by the sick as
useless: The Son of God chooses them to be partakers of His sufferings,
that the glory of God may be made manifest in them. Man curses the
publican, while he employs him to fill his coffers with the plunder of
the poor: The Son of God calls him from the receipt of custom to be an
apostle, higher than the kings of the earth. Man casts away the harlot
like a faded flower, when he has tempted her to become the slave of sin
for a season; and the Son of God calls her, the defiled, the despised,
the forsaken, to Himself, accepts her tears, blesses her offering, and
declares that her sins are forgiven, for she hath loved much; while to
whom little is forgiven the same loveth little....’

Philammon heard no more. With the passionate and impulsive nature of
a Greek fanatic, he burst forward through the crowd, towards the steps
which led to the choir, and above which, in front of the altar, stood
the corpse of Ammonius, enclosed in a coffin of glass, beneath a
gorgeous canopy; and never stopping till he found himself in front of
Cyril’s pulpit, he threw himself upon his face upon the pavement, spread
out his arms in the form of a cross, and lay silent and motionless
before the feet of the multitude.

There was a sudden whisper and rustle in the congregation: but Cyril,
after a moment’s pause, went on--

‘Man, in his pride and self-sufficiency, despises humiliation, and
penance, and the broken and the contrite heart; and tells thee that only
as long as thou doest well unto thyself will he speak well of thee: the
Son of God says that he that humbleth himself, even as this our penitent
brother, he it is who shall be exalted. He it is of whom it is written
that his father saw him afar off, and ran to meet him, and bade put the
best robe on him, and a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet, and
make merry and be glad with the choir of angels who rejoice over one
sinner that repenteth. Arise, my son, whoso-ever thou art; and go in
peace for this night, remembering that he who said, “My belly cleaveth
unto the pavement,” hath also said, “Rejoice not against me, Satan, mine
enemy, for when I fall I shall arise!”’

A thunder-clap of applause, surely as pardonable as any an Alexandrian
church ever heard, followed this dexterous, and yet most righteous,
turn of the patriarch’s oratory: but Philammon raised himself slowly
and fearfully to his knees, and blushing scarlet endured the gaze of ten
thousand eyes.

Suddenly, from beside the pulpit, an old man sprang forward, and clasped
him round the neck. It was Arsenius.

‘My son! my son!’ sobbed he, almost aloud.

‘Slave, as well as son, if you will!’ whispered Philammon. ‘One boon
from the patriarch; and then home to the Laura for ever!’

‘Oh, twice-blest night,’ rolled on above the deep rich voice of Cyril,
‘which beholds at once the coronation of a martyr and the conversion
of a sinner; which increases at the same time the ranks of the church
triumphant, and of the church militant; and pierces celestial essences
with a twofold rapture of thanksgiving, as they welcome on high a
victorious, and on earth a repentant, brother!’

And at a sign from Cyril, Peter the Reader stepped forward, and led
away, gently enough, the two weepers, who were welcomed as they passed
by the blessings, and prayers, and tears even of those fierce fanatics
of Nitria. Nay, Peter himself, as he turned to leave them together in
the sacristy, held out his hand to Philammon.

‘I ask your forgiveness,’ said the poor boy, who plunged eagerly and
with a sort of delight into any and every self-abasement.

‘And I accord it,’ quoth Peter; and returned to the church, looking, and
probably feeling, in a far more pleasant mood than usual.



CHAPTER XXVII: THE PRODIGAL’S RETURN


About ten o’clock the next morning, as Hypatia, worn out with sleepless
sorrow, was trying to arrange her thoughts for the farewell lecture, her
favourite maid announced that a messenger from Synesius waited below. A
letter from Synesius? A gleam of hope flashed across her mind. From him,
surely, might come something of comfort, of advice. Ah! if he only knew
how sorely she was bested!

‘Let him send up his letter.’

‘He refuses to deliver it to any one but yourself. And I think,’--added
the damsel, who had, to tell the truth, at that moment in her purse
a substantial reason for so thinking--‘I think it might be worth your
ladyship’s while to see him.’

Hypatia shook her head impatiently.

‘He seems to know you well, madam, though he refuses to tell his name:
but he bade me put you in mind of a black agate--I cannot tell what
he meant--of a black agate, and a spirit which was to appear when you
rubbed it.’

Hypatia turned pale as death. Was it Philammon again? She felt for the
talisman--it was gone! She must have lost it last night in
Miriam’s chamber. Now she saw the true purpose of the old hag’s
plot--....deceived, tricked, doubly tricked! And what new plot was this?

‘Tell him to leave the letter, and begone.... My father? What? Who is
this? Who are you bringing to me at such a moment?’

And as she spoke, Theon ushered into the chamber no other than Raphael
Aben-Ezra, and then retired.

He advanced slowly towards her, and falling on one knee, placed in her
hand Synesius’s letter.

Hypatia trembled from head to foot at the unexpected apparition....
Well; at least he could know nothing of last night and its disgrace.
But not daring to look him in the face, she took the letter and opened
it.... If she had hoped for comfort from it, her hope was not realised.

‘Synesius to the Philosopher:

‘Even if Fortune cannot take from me all things, yet what she can take
she will. And yet of two things, at least, she shall not rob me--to
prefer that which is best, and to succour the oppressed. Heaven forbid
that she should overpower my judgment, as well as the rest of me!
Therefore I do hate injustice; for that I can do: and my will is to stop
it; but the power to do so is among the things of which she has bereaved
me-before, too, she bereaved me of my children....

‘“Once, in old times, Milesian men were strong.”

And there was a time when I, too, was a comfort to my friends, and
when you used to call me a blessing to every one except myself, as I
squandered for the benefit of others the favour with which the great
regarded me.... My hands they were--then.... But now I am left desolate
of all: unless you have any power. For you and virtue I count among
those good things, of which none can deprive me. But you always have
power, and will have it, surely, now--using it as nobly as you do.

‘As for Nicaeus and Philolaus, two noble youths, and kinsmen of my
own, let it be the business of all who honour you, both private men and
magistrates, to see that they return possessors of their just rights.’
[Footnote: An authentic letter of Synesius to Hypatia.]

‘Of all who honour me!’ said she, with a bitter sigh: and then looked up
quickly at Raphael, as if fearful of having betrayed herself. She turned
deadly pale. In his eyes was a look of solemn pity, which told her that
he knew--not all?--surely not all?

‘Have you seen the--Miriam?’ gasped she, rushing desperately at that
which she most dreaded.

‘Not yet. I arrived but one hour ago; and Hypatia’s welfare is still
more important to me than my own.’

‘My welfare? It is gone!’

‘So much the better. I never found mine till I lost it.’

‘What do you mean?’

Raphael lingered, yet without withdrawing his gaze, as if he had
something of importance to say, which he longed and yet feared to utter.
At last--

‘At least, you will confess that I am better drest than when we met
last. I have returned, you see, like a certain demoniac of Gadara, about
whom we used to argue, clothed--and perhaps also in my right mind....
God knows!’

‘Raphael! are you come here to mock me? You know--you cannot have
been here an hour without knowing--that but yesterday I dreamed of
being’--and she drooped her eyes--‘an empress; that to-day I am ruined;
to-morrow, perhaps, proscribed. Have you no speech for me but your old
sarcasms and ambiguities?’

Raphael stood silent and motionless.

‘Why do you not speak? What is the meaning of this sad, earnest look, so
different from your former self?.... You have something strange to tell
me!’

‘I have,’ said he, speaking very slowly. ‘What--what would Hypatia
answer if, after all, Aben-Ezra said like the dying Julian, “The
Galilean has conquered”?’

‘Julian never said it! It is a monkish calumny.’

‘But I say it.’

‘Impossible!’

‘I say it!’

‘As your dying speech? The true Raphael Aben-Ezra, then, lives no more!’

‘But he may be born again.’

‘And die to philosophy, that he may be born again into barbaric
superstition! Oh worthy metempsychosis! Farewell, sir!’ And she rose to
go.

‘Hear me!--hear me patiently this once, noble, beloved Hypatia! One
more sneer of yours, and I may become again the same case-hardened fiend
which you knew me of old--to all, at least, but you. Oh, do not think
me ungrateful, forgetful! What do I not owe to you, whose pure and lofty
words alone kept smouldering in me the dim remembrance that there was
a Right, a Truth, an unseen world of spirits, after whose pattern man
should aspire to live?’

She paused, and listened in wonder. What faith had she of her own? She
would at least hear what he had found....

‘Hypatia, I am older than you--wiser than you, if wisdom be the fruit of
the tree of knowledge. You know but one side of the medal, Hypatia,
and the fairer; I have seen its reverse as well as its obverse. Through
every form of human thought, of human action, of human sin and folly,
have I been wandering for years, and found no rest--as little in wisdom
as in folly, in spiritual dreams as in sensual brutality. I could not
rest in your Platonism--I will tell you why hereafter. I went on to
Stoicism, Epicurism, Cynicism, Scepticism, and in that lowest deep I
found a lower depth, when I became sceptical of Scepticism itself.’

‘There is a lower deep still,’ thought Hypatia to herself, as she
recollected last night’s magic; but she did not speak.

‘Then in utter abasement, I confessed myself lower than the brutes, who
had a law, and obeyed it, while I was my own lawless God, devil,
harpy, whirlwind.... I needed even my own dog to awaken in me the brute
consciousness of my own existence, or of anything without myself. I took
her, the dog, for my teacher, and obeyed her, for she was wiser than
I. And she led me back--the poor dumb beast--like a God-sent and
God-obeying angel, to human nature, to mercy, to self-sacrifice, to
belief, to worship--to pure and wedded love.’

Hypatia started.... And in the struggle to hide her own bewilderment,
answered almost without knowing it--

‘Wedded love?.... Wedded love? Is that, then, the paltry bait by which
Raphael Aben-Ezra has been tempted to desert philosophy?’

‘Thank Heaven!’ said Raphael to himself. ‘She does not care for me,
then! If she had, pride would have kept her from that sneer.’ Yes, my
dear lady,’ answered he aloud, ‘to desert philosophy, to search after
wisdom; because wisdom itself had sought for me, and found me. But,
indeed, I had hoped that you would have approved of my following your
example for once in my life, and resolving, like you, to enter into the
estate of wedlock.’

‘Do not sneer at me!’ cried she, in her turn, looking up at him with
shame and horror, which made him repent of uttering the words. ‘If you
do not know--you will soon, too soon! Never mention that hateful dream
to me, if you wish to have speech of me more!’

A pang of remorse shot through Raphael’s heart. Who but he himself had
plotted that evil marriage? But she gave him no opportunity of answering
her, and went on hurriedly--

‘Speak to me rather about yourself. What is this strange and sudden
betrothal? What has it to do with Christianity? I had thought that it
was rather by the glories of celibacy--gross and superstitious as their
notions of it are--that the Galileans tempted their converts.’

‘So had I, my dearest lady,’ answered he, as, glad to turn the subject
for a moment, and perhaps a little nettled by her contemptuous tone, he
resumed something of his old arch and careless manner. ‘But--there is
no accounting for man’s agreeable inconsistencies--one morning I found
myself, to my astonishment, seized by two bishops, and betrothed,
whether I chose or not, to a young lady who but a few days before had
been destined for a nunnery.’

‘Two bishops?’

‘I speak simple truth. The one was Synesius of course;--that most
incoherent and most benevolent of busybodies chose to betray me behind
my back:-but I will not trouble you with that part of my story. The real
wonder is that the other episcopal match-maker was Augustine of Hippo
himself!’

‘Anything to bribe a convert,’ said Hypatia contemptuously.

‘I assure you, no. He informed me, and her also, openly and uncivilly
enough, that he thought us very much to be pitied for so great a
fall.... But as we neither of us seemed to have any call for the higher
life of celibacy, he could not press it on us.... We should have trouble
in the flesh. But if we married we had not sinned. To which I answered
that my humility was quite content to sit in the very lowest ranks, with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.... He replied by an encomium on virginity, in
which I seemed to hear again the voice of Hypatia herself.’

‘And sneered at it inwardly, as you used to sneer at me.’

‘Really I was in no sneering mood at that moment; and whatsoever I
may have felt inclined to reply, he was kind enough to say for me and
himself the next minute.’

‘What do you mean?’

‘He went on, to my utter astonishment, by such a eulogium on wedlock as
I never heard from Jew or heathen, and ended by advice to young married
folk so thoroughly excellent and to the point, that I could not help
telling him, when he stopped; what a pity I thought it that he had
not himself married, and made some good woman happy by putting his own
recipes into practice.... And at that, Hypatia, I saw an expression on
his face which made me wish for the moment that I had bitten out this
impudent tongue of mine, before I so rashly touched some deep old
wound.... That man has wept bitter tears ere now, be sure of it.... But
he turned the conversation instantly, like a well-bred gentleman as he
is, by saying, with the sweetest smile, that though he had made it a
solemn rule never to be a party to making up any marriage, yet in our
case Heaven had so plainly pointed us out for each other, etc. etc.,
that he could not refuse himself the pleasure.... and ended by a
blessing as kindly as ever came from the lips of man.’

‘You seem wonderfully taken with the sophist of Hippo,’ said Hypatia
impatiently; ‘and forget, perhaps, that his opinions, especially when,
as you confess, they are utterly inconsistent with themselves, are not
quite as important to me as they seem to have become to you.’

‘Whether he be consistent or not about marriage,’ said Raphael, somewhat
proudly, ‘I care little. I went to him to tell me, not about the
relation of the sexes, on which point I am probably as good a judge as
he--but about God and on that subject he told me enough to bring me back
to Alexandria, that I might undo, if possible, somewhat of the wrong
which I have done to Hypatia.’

‘What wrong have you done me?.... You are silent? Be sure, at least,
that whatsoever it may be, you will not wipe it out by trying to make a
proselyte of me!’

‘Be not too sure of that. I have found too great a treasure not to wish
to share it with Theon’s daughter.’

‘A treasure?’ said she, half scornfully.

‘Yes, indeed. You recollect my last words, when we parted there below a
few months ago?’

Hypatia was silent. One terrible possibility at which he had hinted
flashed across her memory for the first time since;.... but she spurned
proudly from her the heaven-sent warning.

‘I told you that, like Diogenes, I went forth to seek a man. Did I not
promise you, that when I had found one you should be the first to hear
of him? And I have found a man.’

Hypatia waved her beautiful hand. ‘I know whom you would say.... that
crucified one. Be it so. I want not a man, but a god.’

‘What sort of a god, Hypatia? A god made up of our own intellectual
notions, or rather of negations of them--of infinity and eternity,
and invisibility, and impassibility--and why not of immortality, too,
Hypatia? For I recollect we used to agree that it was a carnal degrading
of the Supreme One to predicate of Him so merely human a thing as
virtue.’

Hypatia was silent.

‘Now I have always had a sort of fancy that what we wanted, as the
first predicate of our Absolute One, was that He was to be not merely an
infinite God--whatever that meant, which I suspect we did not always see
quite clearly--or an eternal one--or an omnipotent one--or even merely a
one God at all; none of which predicates, I fear, did we understand more
clearly than the first: but that he must be a righteous God:--or
rather, as we used sometimes to say that He was to have no
predicate--Righteousness itself. And all along, I could not help
remembering that my old sacred Hebrew books told me of such a one; and
feeling that they might have something to tell me which--’

‘Which I did not tell you! And this, then, caused your air of reserve,
and of sly superiority over the woman whom you mocked by calling her
your pupil! I little suspected you of so truly Jewish a jealousy! Why,
oh why, did you not tell me this?’

‘Because I was a beast, Hypatia; and had all but forgotten what this
righteousness was like; and was afraid to find out lest it should
condemn me. Because I was a devil, Hypatia; and hated righteousness, and
neither wished to see you righteous, nor God righteous either, because
then you would both have been unlike myself. God be merciful to me a
sinner!’

She looked up in his face. The man was changed as if by miracle--and yet
not changed. There was the same gallant consciousness of power, the same
subtle and humorous twinkle in those strong ripe Jewish features and
those glittering eyes; and yet every line in his face was softened,
sweetened; the mask of sneering faineance was gone--imploring tenderness
and earnestness beamed from his whole countenance. The chrysalis case
had fallen off, and disclosed the butterfly within. She sat looking
at him, and passed her hand across her eyes, as if to try whether the
apparition would not vanish. He, the subtle!--he, the mocker!--he, the
Lucian of Alexandria!--he whose depth and power had awed her, even in
his most polluted days.... And this was the end of him....

‘It is a freak of cowardly superstition.... Those Christians have been
frightening him about his sins and their Tartarus.’

She looked again into his bright, clear, fearless face, and was ashamed
of her own calumny. And this was the end of him--of Synesius--of
Augustine--of learned and unlearned, Goth and Roman .... The great flood
would have its way, then.... Could she alone fight against it?

She could! Would she submit?--She? Her will should stand firm, her
reason free, to the last--to the death if need be.... And yet last
night!--last night!

At last she spoke, without looking up.

‘And what if you have found a man in that crucified one? Have you found
in him a God also?’

‘Does Hypatia recollect Glaucon’s definition of the perfectly righteous
man?.... How, without being guilty of one unrighteous act, he must
labour his life long under the imputation of being utterly unrighteous,
in order that his disinterestedness may be thoroughly tested, and by
proceeding in such a course, arrive inevitably, as Glaucon says, not
only in Athens of old, or in Judaea of old, but, as you yourself will
agree, in Christian Alexandria at this moment, at--do you remember,
Hypatia?--bonds, and the scourge, and lastly, at the cross itself.... If
Plato’s idea of the righteous man be a crucified one, why may not mine
also? If, as we both--and old Bishop Clemens, too--as good a Platonist
as we, remember--and Augustine himself, would agree, Plato in speaking
those strange words, spoke not of himself, but by the Spirit of God,
why should not others have spoken by the same Spirit when they spoke the
same words?’

‘A crucified man.... Yes. But a crucified God, Raphael! I shudder at the
blasphemy.’

‘So do my poor dear fellow-countrymen. Are they the more righteous in
their daily doings, Hypatia, on account of their fancied reverence for
the glory of One who probably knows best how to preserve and manifest
His own glory? But you assent to the definition? Take care!’ said he,
with one of his arch smiles, ‘I have been fighting with Augustine, and
have become of late a terrible dialectician. Do you assent to it?’

‘Of course--it is Plato’s.’

‘But do you assent merely because it is written in the book called
Plato’s, or because your reason tells you that it is true?.... You
will not tell me. Tell me this, then, at least. Is not the perfectly
righteous man the highest specimen of men?’

‘Surely,’ said she half carelessly: but not unwilling, like a
philosopher and a Greek, as a matter of course, to embark in anything
like a word-battle, and to shut out sadder thoughts for a moment.

‘Then must not the Autanthropos, the archetypal and ideal man, who is
more perfect than any individual specimen, be perfectly righteous also?’

‘Yes.’

‘Suppose, then, for the sake of one of those pleasant old games of
ours, an argument, that he wished to manifest his righteousness to
the world.... The only method for him, according to Plato, would be
Glaucon’s, of calumny and persecution, the scourge and the cross?’

‘What words are these, Raphael? Material scourges and crosses for an
eternal and spiritual idea?’

‘Did you ever yet, Hypatia, consider at leisure what the archetype of
man might be like?’

Hypatia started, as at a new thought, and confessed--as every
Neo--Platonist would have done--that she had never done so.

‘And yet our master, Plato, bade us believe that there was a substantial
archetype of each thing, from a flower to a nation, eternal in the
heavens. Perhaps we have not been faithful Platonists enough heretofore,
my dearest tutor. Perhaps, being philosophers, and somewhat of Pharisees
to boot, we began all our lucubrations as we did our prayers, by
thanking God that we were not as other men were; and so misread another
passage in the _Republic_, which we used in pleasant old days to be fond
of quoting.’

‘What was that?’ asked Hypatia, who became more and more interested
every moment.

‘That philosophers were men.’

‘Are you mocking me? Plato defines the philosopher as the man who
seeks after the objects of knowledge, while others seek after those of
opinion.’

‘And most truly. But what if, in our eagerness to assert that wherein
the philosopher differed from other men, we had overlooked that in which
he resembled other men; and so forgot that, after all, man was a genus
whereof the philosopher was only a species?’

Hypatia sighed.

‘Do you not think, then, that as the greater contains the less, and the
archetype of the genus that of the species, we should have been wiser if
we had speculated a little more on the archetype of man as man,
before we meddled with a part of that archetype,--the archetype of the
philosopher?.... Certainly it would have been the easier course, for
there are more men than philosophers, Hypatia; and every man is a real
man, and a fair subject for examination, while every philosopher is not
a real philosopher--our friends the Academics, for instance, and even a
Neo-Platonist or two whom we know? You seem impatient. Shall I cease?’

‘You mistook the cause of my impatience,’ answered she, looking up at
him with her great sad eyes. ‘Go on.’

‘Now--for I am going to be terribly scholastic--is it not the very
definition of man, that he is, alone of all known things, a spirit
temporarily united to an animal body?’

‘Enchanted in it, as in a dungeon, rather,’ said she sighing.

‘Be it so if you will. But--must we not say that the archetype--the very
man--that if he is the archetype, he too will be, or must have been,
once at least, temporarily enchanted into an animal body?.... You
are silent. I will not press you.... Only ask you to consider at your
leisure whether Plato may not justify somewhat from the charge of
absurdity the fisherman of Galilee, where he said that He in whose
image man is made was made flesh, and dwelt with him bodily there by the
lake-side at Tiberias, and that he beheld His Glory, the glory as of the
only-begotten of the Father.’

‘That last question is a very different one. God made flesh! My reason
revolts at it.’

‘Old Homer’s reason did not.’

Hypatia started, for she recollected her yesterday’s cravings after
those old, palpable, and human deities. And--‘Go on,’ she cried eagerly.

‘Tell me, then--This archetype of man, if it exists anywhere, it must
exist eternally in the mind of God? At least, Plato would have so said?’

‘Yes.’

‘And derive its existence immediately from Him?’

‘Yes.’

‘But a man is one willing person, unlike to all others.’

‘Yes.’

‘Then this archetype must be such.’

‘I suppose so.’

‘But possessing the faculties and properties of all men in their highest
perfection.’

‘Of course.’

‘How sweetly and obediently my late teacher becomes my pupil!’

Hypatia looked at him with her eyes full of tears.

‘I never taught you anything, Raphael.’

‘You taught me most, beloved lady, when you least thought of it. But
tell me one thing more. Is it not the property of every man to be a
son? For you can conceive of a man as not being a father, but not as not
being a son.’

‘Be it so.’

‘Then this archetype must be a son also.’

‘Whose son, Raphael?’

‘Why not of “Zeus, father of gods and men”? For we agreed that it--we
will call it he, now, having agreed that it is a person--could owe its
existence to none but God Himself.’

‘And what then?’ said Hypatia, fixing those glorious eyes full on his
face, in an agony of doubt, but yet, as Raphael declared to his dying
day, of hope and joy.

‘Well, Hypatia, and must not a son be of the same species as his father?
“Eagles,” says the poet, “do not beget doves.” Is the word son anything
but an empty and false metaphor, unless the son be the perfect and equal
likeness of his father?’

‘Heroes beget sons worse than themselves, says the poet.’

‘We are not talking now of men as they are, whom Homer’s Zeus calls the
most wretched of all the beasts of the field; we are talking--are we
not?--of a perfect and archetypal Son, and a perfect and archetypal
Father, in a perfect and eternal world, wherein is neither growth,
decay, nor change; and of a perfect and archetypal generation, of which
the only definition can be, that like begets its perfect like?....
You are silent. Be so, Hypatia.... We have gone up too far into the
abysses....

And so they both were silent for a while. And Raphael thought solemn
thoughts about Victoria, and about ancient signs of Isaiah’s, which were
to him none the less prophecies concerning The Man whom he had found,
because he prayed and trusted that the same signs might be repeated to
himself, and a child given to him also, as a token that, in spite of all
his baseness, ‘God was with him.’

But he was a Jew, and a man: Hypatia was a Greek, and a woman--and for
that matter, so were the men of her school. To her, the relations
and duties of common humanity shone with none of the awful and divine
meaning which they did in the eyes of the converted Jew, awakened for
the first time in his life to know the meaning of his own scriptures,
and become an Israelite indeed. And Raphael’s dialectic, too, though it
might silence her, could not convince her. Her creed, like those of her
fellow-philosophers, was one of the fancy and the religious sentiment,
rather than of the reason and the moral sense. All the brilliant
cloud-world in which she had revelled for years,--cosmogonies,
emanations, affinities, symbolisms, hierarchies, abysses, eternities,
and the rest of it--though she could not rest in them, not even believe
in, them--though they had vanished into thin air at her most utter
need,--yet--they were too pretty to be lost sight of for ever; and,
struggling against the growing conviction of her reason, she answered at
last--

‘And you would have me give up, as you seem to have done, the sublime,
the beautiful, the heavenly, for a dry and barren chain of dialectic--in
which, for aught I know,--for after all, Raphael, I cannot cope with
you--I am a woman--a weak woman!’

And she covered her face with her hands.

‘For aught you know, what?’ asked Raphael gently.

‘You may have made the worse appear the better reason.’

‘So said Aristophanes of Socrates. But hear me once more, beloved
Hypatia. You refuse to give up the beautiful, the sublime, the heavenly?
What if Raphael Aben-Ezra, at least, had never found them till now?
Recollect what I said just now--what if our old Beautiful, and Sublime,
and Heavenly, had been the sheerest materialism, notions spun by our own
brains out of the impressions of pleasant things, and high things, and
low things, and awful things, which we had seen with our bodily eyes?
What if I had discovered that the spiritual is not the intellectual, but
the moral; and that the spiritual world is not, as we used to make it,
a world of our own intellectual abstractions, or of our own physical
emotions, religious or other, but a world of righteous or unrighteous
persons? What if I had discovered that one law of the spiritual
world, in which all others were contained, was righteousness; and that
disharmony with that law, which we called unspirituality, was not being
vulgar, or clumsy, or ill-taught, or unimaginative, or dull, but simply
being unrighteous? What if I had discovered that righteousness, and it
alone, was the beautiful righteousness, the sublime, the heavenly, the
Godlike--ay, God Himself? And what if it had dawned on me, as by a great
sunrise, what that righteousness was like? What if I had seen a human
being, a woman, too, a young weak girl, showing forth the glory and the
beauty of God? Showing me that the beautiful was to mingle unshrinking,
for duty’s sake, with all that is most foul and loathsome; that
the sublime was to stoop to the most menial offices, the most
outwardly-degrading self-denials; that to be heavenly was to know that
the commonest relations, the most vulgar duties, of earth, were God’s
commands, and only to be performed aright by the help of the same spirit
by which He rules the Universe; that righteousness was to love, to help,
to suffer for--if need be, to die for--those who, in themselves, seem
fitted to arouse no feelings except indignation and disgust? What if,
for the first time, I trust not for the last time, in my life, I saw
this vision; and at the sight of it my eyes were opened, and I knew it
for the likeness and the glory of God? What if I, a Platonist, like John
of Galilee, and Paul of Tarsus, yet, like them, a Hebrew of the Hebrews,
had confessed to myself--If the creature can love thus, how much more
its archetype? If weak woman can endure thus, how much more a Son of
God? If for the good of others, man has strength to sacrifice himself in
part, God will have strength to sacrifice Himself utterly. If He has not
done it, He will do it: or He will be less beautiful, less sublime, less
heavenly, less righteous than my poor conception of Him, ay, than this
weak playful girl! Why should I not believe those who tell me that
He has done it already? What if their evidence be, after all, only
probability? I do not want mathematical demonstration to prove to me
that when a child was in danger his father saved him--neither do I here.
My reason, my heart, every faculty of me, except this stupid sensuous
experience, which I find deceiving me every moment, which cannot even
prove to me my own existence, accepts that story of Calvary as the most
natural, most probable, most necessary of earthly events, assuming only
that God is a righteous Person, and not some dream of an all-pervading
necessary spirit-nonsense which, in its very terms, confesses its own
materialism.’

Hypatia answered with a forced smile.

‘Raphael Aben-Ezra has deserted the method of the severe dialectician
for that of the eloquent lover.’

‘Not altogether,’ said he, smiling in return. ‘For suppose that I had
said to myself, We Platonists agree that the sight of God is the highest
good.’

Hypatia once more shuddered at last night’s recollections.

‘And if He be righteous, and righteousness be--as I know it to
be--identical with love, then He will desire that highest good for men
far more than they can desire it for themselves.... Then He will desire
to show Himself and His own righteousness to them.... Will you make
answer, dearest Hypatia, or shall I?....or does your silence give
consent? At least let me go on to say this, that if God do desire to
show His righteousness to men, His only perfect method, according to
Plato, will be that of calumny, persecution, the scourge, and the cross,
that so He, like Glaucon’s righteous man, may remain for ever free from
any suspicion of selfish interest, or weakness of endurance.... Am I
deserting the dialectic method now, Hypatia?.... You are still silent?
You will not hear me, I see.... At some future day, the philosopher may
condescend to lend a kinder ear to the words of her greatest debtor ....
Or, rather, she may condescend to hear, in her own heart, the voice of
that Archetypal Man, who has been loving her, guiding her, heaping her
with every perfection of body and of mind, inspiring her with all pure
and noble longings, and only asks of her to listen to her own reason,
her own philosophy, when they proclaim Him as the giver of them, and to
impart them freely and humbly, as He has imparted them to her, to the
poor, and the brutish, and the sinful, whom He loves as well as He loves
her.... Farewell!’

‘Stay!’ said she, springing up: ‘whither are you going?’

‘To do a little good before I die, having done much evil. To farm,
plant, and build, and rescue a little corner of Ormuzd’s earth, as the
Persians would say, out of the dominion of Ahriman. To fight Ausurian
robbers, feed Thracian mercenaries, save a few widows from starvation,
and a few orphans from slavery.... Perhaps to leave behind me a son of
David’s line, who will be a better Jew, because a better Christian,
than his father.... We shall have trouble in the flesh, Augustine tells
us.... But, as I answered him, I really have had so little thereof
yet, that my fair share may probably be rather a useful education than
otherwise. Farewell!’

‘Stay!’ said she. ‘Come again!--again! And her.... Bring her.... I must
see her! She must be noble, indeed, to be worthy of you.’

‘She is many a hundred miles away.’

‘Ah! Perhaps she might have taught something to me--me, the philosopher!
You need not have feared me.... I have no heart to make converts
now.... Oh, Raphael Aben-Ezra, why break the bruised reed? My plans are
scattered to the winds, my pupils worthless, my fair name tarnished, my
conscience heavy with the thought of my own cruelty.... If you do not
know all, you will know it but too soon .... My last hope, Synesius,
implores for himself the hope which I need from him....And, over and
above it all.... You!.... Et tu, Brute! Why not fold my mantle round me,
like Julius of old, and die!’

Raphael stood looking sadly at her, as her whole face sank into utter
prostration. ...............

‘Yes--come.... The Galilaean.... If He conquers strong men, can the weak
maid resist Him? Come soon.... This afternoon.... My heart is breaking
fast.’

‘At the eighth hour this afternoon?’

‘Yes.... At noon I lecture.... take my farewell, rather, for ever of
the schools....Gods! What have I to say?.... And tell me about Him of
Nazareth. Farewell!’

‘Farewell, beloved lady! At the ninth hour, you shall hear of Him of
Nazareth.’

Why did his own words sound to him strangely pregnant, all but ominous?
He almost fancied that not he, but some third person had spoken them.
He kissed Hypatia’s hand, it was as cold as ice; and his heart, too, in
spite of all his bliss, felt cold and heavy, as he left the room.

As he went down the steps into the street, a young man sprang from
behind one of the pillars, and seized his arm.

‘Aha! my young Coryphaeus of pious plunderers! What do you want with
me?’

Philammon, for it was he, looked at him an instant, and recognised him.

‘Save her! for the love of God, save her!’

‘Whom?’

‘Hypatia!’

‘How long has her salvation been important to you, my good friend?’

‘For God’s sake,’ said Philammon, ‘go back and warn her! She will hear
you--you are rich--you used to be her friend--I know you--I have heard
of you.... Oh, if you ever cared for her--if you ever felt for her a
thousandth part of what I feel--go in and warn her not to stir from
home!’

‘I must hear more of this,’ said Raphael, who saw that the boy was in
earnest. ‘Come in with me, and speak to her father.’

‘No! not in that house! Never in that house again! Do not ask me why:
but go yourself. She will not hear me. Did you--did you prevent her from
listening?’

‘What do you mean?’

‘I have been here--ages! I sent a note in by her maid, and she returned
no answer.’

Raphael recollected then, for the first time, a note which he had seen
brought to her during the conversation.

‘I saw her receive a note. She tossed it away. Tell me your story. If
there is reason in it, I will bear your message myself. Of what is she
to be warned?’

‘Of a plot--I know that there is a plot--against her among the monks
and Parabolani. As I lay in bed this morning in Arsenius’s room--they
thought I was asleep--’

‘Arsenius? Has that venerable fanatic, then, gone the way of all
monastic flesh, and turned persecutor?’

‘God forbid! I heard him beseeching Peter the Reader to refrain from
something, I cannot tell what; but I caught her name.... I heard Peter
say, “She that hindereth will hinder till she be taken out of the way.”
 And when he went out into the passage I heard him say to another, “That
thou doest, do quickly!....”’

‘These are slender grounds, my friend.’

‘Ah, you do not know of what those men are capable!’

‘Do I not? Where did you and I meet last?’

Philammon blushed and burst forth again. ‘That was enough for me. I know
the hatred which they bear her, the crimes which they attribute to
her. Her house would have been attacked last night had it not been for
Cyril.... And I knew Peter’s tone. He spoke too gently and softly not to
mean something devilish. I watched all the morning for an opportunity of
escape, and here I am!--Will you take my message, or see her--’

‘What?’

‘God only knows, and the devil whom they worship instead of God.’

Raphael hurried back into the house--‘Could he see Hypatia?’ She had
shut herself up in her private room, strictly commanding that no visitor
should be admitted.... ‘Where was Theon, then?’ He had gone out by the
canal gate half an hour before, with a bundle of mathematical papers
under his arm, no one knew whither.... ‘Imbecile old idiot!’ and he
hastily wrote on his tablet-- ‘Do not despise the young monk’s warning.
I believe him to speak the truth. As you love yourself and your father,
Hypatia, stir not out to-day.’

He bribed a maid to take the message upstairs; and passed his time in
the hall in warning the servants. But they would not believe him. It was
true the shops were shut in some quarters, and the Museum gardens empty;
people were a little frightened after yesterday. But Cyril, they had
heard for certain, had threatened excommunication only last night to any
Christian who broke the peace; and there had not been a monk to be seen
in the streets the whole morning. And as for any harm happening to their
mistress--impossible! ‘The very wild beasts would not tear her,’ said
the huge negro porter, ‘if she was thrown into the amphitheatre.’

--Whereat a maid boxed his ears for talking of such a thing; and then,
by way of mending it, declared that she knew for certain that her
mistress could turn aside the lightning, and call legions of spirits to
fight for her with a nod.... What was to be done with such idolaters?
And yet who could help liking them the better for it?

At last the answer came down, in the old graceful, studied,
self-conscious handwriting.

‘It is a strange way of persuading me to your new faith, to bid me
beware, on the very first day of your preaching, of the wickedness of
those who believe it. I thank you: but your affection for me makes you
timorous. I dread nothing. They will not dare. Did they dare now, they
would have dared long ago. As for that youth--to obey or to believe his
word, even to seem aware of his existence, were shame to me henceforth.
Because he is insolent enough to warn me therefore I will go. Fear not
for me. You would not wish me, for the first time in my life, to fear
for myself. I must follow my destiny. I must speak the words which
I have to speak. Above all, I must let no Christian say, that the
philosopher dared less than the fanatic. If my Gods are Gods, then will
they protect me: and if not, let your God prove His rule as seems to Him
good.’

Raphael tore the letter to fragments.... The guards, at least, were not
gone mad like the rest of the world. It wanted half an hour of the time
of her lecture. In the interval he might summon force enough to crush
all Alexandria. And turning suddenly, he darted out of the room and out
of the house.

‘Quem Deus vult perdere-!’ cried he to Philammon, with a gesture of
grief. ‘Stay here and stop her!--make a last appeal! Drag the horses’
heads down, if you can! I will be back in ten minutes.’ And he ran off
for the nearest gate of the Museum gardens.

On the other side of the gardens lay the courtyard of the palace. There
were gates in plenty communicating between them. If he could but see
Orestes, even alarm the guard in time!....

And he hurried through the walks and alcoves, now deserted by the
fearful citizens, to the nearest gate. It was fast, and barricaded
firmly on the outside.

Terrified, he ran on to the next; it was barred also. He saw the reason
in a moment, and maddened as he saw it. The guards, careless about the
Museum, or reasonably fearing no danger from the Alexandrian populace to
the glory and wonder of their city, or perhaps wishing wisely enough
to concentrate their forces in the narrowest space, had contented
themselves with cutting off all communication with the gardens, and so
converting the lofty partition-wall into the outer enceinte of their
marble citadel. At all events, the doors leading from the Museum itself
might be open. He knew them every one, every hall, passage, statue,
picture, almost every book in that vast treasure-house of ancient
civilisation. He found an entrance; hurried through well-known corridors
to a postern through which he and Orestes had lounged a hundred times,
their lips full of bad words, their hearts of worse thoughts, gathered
in those records of the fair wickedness of old.... It was fast. He beat
upon it but no one answered. He rushed on and tried another. No one
answered there. Another--still silence and despair!.... He rushed
upstairs, hoping that from the windows above he might be able to call to
the guard. The prudent soldiers had locked and barricaded the entrances
to the upper floors of the whole right wing, lest the palace court
should be commanded from thence. Whither now? Back--and whither then?
Back, round endless galleries, vaulted halls, staircases, doorways, some
fast, some open, up and down, trying this way and that, losing himself
at whiles in that enormous silent labyrinth. And his breath failed him,
his throat was parched, his face burned as with the simoom wind, his
legs were trembling under him. His presence of mind, usually so perfect,
failed him utterly. He was baffled, netted; there was a spell upon him.
Was it a dream? Was it all one of those hideous nightmares of endless
pillars beyond pillars, stairs above stairs, rooms within rooms,
changing, shifting, lengthening out for ever and for ever before the
dreamer, narrowing, closing in on him, choking him? Was it a dream? Was
he doomed to wander for ever and for ever in some palace of the dead, to
expiate the sin which he had learnt and done therein? His brain, for the
first time in his life, began to reel. He could recollect nothing but
that something dreadful was to happen--and that he had to prevent it,
and could not.... Where was he now? In a little by-chamber.... He had
talked with her there a hundred times, looking out over the Pharos and
the blue Mediterranean.... What was that roar below? A sea of weltering
yelling heads, thousands on thousands, down to the very beach; and from
their innumerable throats one mighty war-cry--‘God, and the mother
of God!’ Cyril’s hounds were loose.... He reeled from the window, and
darted frantically away again.... whither, he knew not, and never knew
until his dying day.

And Philammon?.... Sufficient for the chapter, as for the day, is the
evil thereof.



CHAPTER XXVIII: WOMAN’S LOVE


Pelagia had passed that night alone in sleepless sorrow, which was not
diminished by her finding herself the next morning palpably a prisoner
in her own house. Her girls told her that they had orders--they would
not say from whom--to prevent her leaving her own apartments. And though
some of them made the announcement with sighs and tears of condolence,
yet more than one, she could see, was well inclined to make her feel
that her power was over, and that there were others besides herself who
might aspire to the honour of reigning favourite.

What matter to her? Whispers, sneers, and saucy answers fell on her ear
unheeded. She had one idol, and she had lost it; one power, and it had
failed her. In the heaven above, and in the earth beneath, was neither
peace, nor help, nor hope; nothing but black, blank, stupid terror and
despair. The little weak infant soul, which had just awakened in her,
had been crushed and stunned in its very birth-hour; and instinctively
she crept away to the roof of the tower where her apartments were, to
sit and weep alone.

There she sat, hour after hour, beneath the shade of the large windsail,
which served in all Alexandrian houses the double purpose of a shelter
from the sun and a ventilator for the rooms below; and her eye roved
carelessly over that endless sea of roofs and towers, and masts, and
glittering canals, and gliding boats; but she saw none of them--nothing
but one beloved face, lost, lost for ever.

At last a low whistle roused her from her dream. She looked up.
Across the narrow lane, from one of the embrasures of the opposite
house-parapet bright eyes were peering at her. She moved angrily to
escape them.

The whistle was repeated, and a head rose cautiously above the
parapet.... It was Miriam’s. Casting a careful look around, Pelagia went
forward. What could the old woman want with her?

Miriam made interrogative signs, which Pelagia understood as asking her
whether she was alone; and the moment that an answer in the negative was
returned, Miriam rose, tossed over to her feet a letter weighted with a
pebble, and then vanished again.

‘I have watched here all day! They refused me admittance below. Beware
of Wulf, of every one. Do not stir from your chamber. There is a plot
to carry you off to-night, and give you up to your brother the monk; you
are betrayed; be brave!’

Pelagia read it with blanching cheek and staring eyes; and took, at
least, the last part of Miriam’s advice. For walking down the stair, she
passed proudly through her own rooms, and commanding back the girls who
would have stayed her, with a voice and gesture at which they quailed,
went straight down, the letter in her hand, to the apartment where the
Amal usually spent his mid-day hours.

As she approached the door, she heard loud voices within.... His!--yes;
but Wulf’s also. Her heart failed her, and she stopped a moment to
listen.... She heard Hypatia’s name; and mad with curiosity, crouched
down at the lock, and hearkened to every word.

‘She will not accept me, Wulf.’

‘If she will not, she shall go farther and fare worse. Besides, I tell
you, she is hard run. It is her last chance, and she will jump at it.
The Christians are mad with her; if a storm blows up, her life is not
worth--that!’

‘It is a pity that we have not brought her hither already.’

‘It is; but we could not. We must not break with Orestes till the palace
is in our hands.’

‘And will it ever be in our hands, friend?’

‘Certain. We were round at every picquet last night, and the very notion
of an Amal’s heading them made them so eager, that we had to bribe them
to be quiet rather than to rise.’

‘Odin! I wish I were among them now!’

‘Wait till the city rises. If the day pass over without a riot, I know
nothing. The treasure is all on board, is it not?’

‘Yes, and the galleys ready. I have been working like a horse at them
all the morning, as you would let me do nothing else. And Goderic will
not be back from the palace, you say, till nightfall!’

‘If we are attacked first, we are to throw up a fire signal to him, and
he is to come off hither with what Goths he can muster. If the palace is
attacked first, he is to give us the signal, and we are to pack up and
row round thither. And in the meanwhile he is to make that hound of a
Greek prefect as drunk as he can.’

‘The Greek will see him under the table. He has drugs, I know, as all
these Roman rascals have, to sober him when he likes; and then he
sets to work and drinks again. Send off old Smid, and let him beat the
armourer if he can.’

‘A very good thought!’ said Wulf, and came out instantly for the purpose
of putting it in practice.

Pelagia had just time to retreat into an adjoining doorway: but she had
heard enough; and as Wulf passed, she sprang to him and caught him by
the arm.

‘Oh, come in hither! Speak to me one moment; for mercy’s sake speak
to me!’ and she drew him, half against his will, into the chamber, and
throwing herself at his feet, broke out into a childlike wail.

Wulf stood silent, utterly discomfited by this unexpected submission,
where he had expected petulant and artful resistance. He almost felt
guilty and ashamed, as he looked down into that beautiful imploring
face, convulsed with simple sorrow, as of a child for a broken toy.....
At last she spoke.

‘Oh, what have I done-what have I done? Why must you take him from me?
What have I done but love him, honour him, worship him? I know you love
him; and I love you for it.--I do indeed! But you--what is your love
to mine? Oh, I would die for him--be torn in pieces for him--now, this
moment!....

Wulf was silent.

‘What have I done but love him? What could I wish but to make him
happy? I was rich enough, praised, and petted;.... and then he came,....
glorious as he is, like a god among men--among apes rather--and I
worshipped him: was I wrong in that? I gave up all for him: was I wrong
in that? I gave him myself: what could I do more? He condescended to
like me--he the hero! Could I help submitting? I loved him: could I help
loving him? Did I wrong him in that? Cruel, cruel Wulf!....’

Wulf was forced to be stern, or he would have melted at once.

‘And what was your love worth to him? What has it done for him? It has
made him a sot, an idler, a laughing-stock to these Greek dogs, when he
might have been their conqueror, their king. Foolish woman, who cannot
see that your love has been his bane, his ruin! He, who ought by now
to have been sitting upon the throne of the Ptolemies, the lord of all
south of the Mediterranean--as he shall be still!’

Pelagia looked tip at him wide-eyed, as if her mind was taking in slowly
some vast new thought, under the weight of which it reeled already. Then
she rose slowly.

‘And he might be Emperor of Africa.’

‘And he shall be; but not--’

‘Not with me!’ she almost shrieked. ‘No! not with wretched, ignorant,
polluted me! I see--oh God, I see it all! And this is why you want him
to marry her--her--’

She could not utter the dreaded name.

Wulf could not trust himself to speak; but he bowed his head in
acquiescence. ...............

‘Yes--I will go--up into the desert--with Philammon--and you shall never
hear of me again. And I will be a nun, and pray for him, that he may be
a great king, and conquer all the world. You will tell him why I went
away, will you not? Yes, I will go,--now, at once--’

She turned away hurriedly, as if to act upon her promise, and then she
sprang again to Wulf with a sudden shudder.

‘I cannot, Wulf!--I cannot leave him! I shall go mad if I do! Do not
be angry;--I will promise anything--take any oath you like, if you will
only let me stay here. Only as a slave--as anything--if I may but look
at him sometimes. No--not even that--but to be tinder the same roof with
him, only--Oh, let me be but a slave in the kitchen! I will make over
all I have to him--to you--to any one! And you shall tell him that I am
gone--dead, if you will.--Only let me stay! And I will wear rags, and
grind in the mill.... Even that will be delicious, to know that he
is eating the bread which I have made! And if I ever dare speak to
him--even to come near hint--let the steward hang me up by the wrists,
and whip me, like the slave which I deserve to be!... And then shall
I soon grow old and ugly with grief, and--there will be no more danger
then, dear Wulf, will there, from this accursed face of mine? Only
promise me that, and--There he is calling you! Don’t let him come in
and see me!--I cannot bear it! Go to him, quick, and tell him all.--No,
don’t tell him yet....’

And she sank down again on the floor, as Wulf went out murmuring to
himself--

‘Poor child! poor child! well for thee this clay if thou wert dead, and
at the bottom of Hela!’

And Pelagia heard what he said.

Gradually, amid sobs and tears, and stormy confusion of impossible hopes
and projects, those words took root in her mind, and spread, till they
filled her whole heart and brain.

‘Well for me if I were dead?’

And she rose slowly.

‘Well for me if I were dead? And why not? Then it would indeed be
all settled. There would be no more danger from poor little Pelagia
then....’

She went slowly, firmly, proudly, into the well-known chamber.... She
threw herself upon the bed, and covered the pillow with kisses. Her eye
fell on the Amal’s sword, which hung across the bed’s-head, after the
custom of Gothic warriors. She seized it, and took it down, shuddering.

‘Yes!.... Let it be with this, if it must be. And it must be. I cannot
bear it! Anything but shame! To have fancied all my life--vain fool that
I was!--that every one loved and admired me, and to find that they were
despising me, hating me, all along! Those students at the lecture-room
door told me I was despised. The old monk told me so--Fool that I was!
I forgot it next day!--For he--he loved me still!--All--how could I
believe them, till his own lips had said it?.... Intolerable!.... And
yet women as bad as I am have been honoured--when they were dead. What
was that song which I used to sing about Epicharis, who hung herself in
the litter, and Leaina, who bit out her tongue, lest the torture should
drive them to betray their lovers? There used to be a statue of Leaina,
they say, at Athens,--a lioness without a tongue.... And whenever I sang
the song, the theatre used to rise, and shout, and call them noble and
blessed.... I never could tell why then; but I know now!--I know now!
Perhaps they may call me noble, after all. At least, they may say “She
was a--a--but she dare die for the man she loved!”.... Ay, but God
despises me too, and elates me. He will send me to eternal fire.
Philammon said so--though he was my brother. The old monk said
so--though he wept as he said it.... The flames of hell for ever! Oh,
not for ever! Great, dreadful God! Not for ever! Indeed, I did not know!
No one taught me about right and wrong, and I never knew that I had been
baptized--Indeed, I never knew! And it was so pleasant--so pleasant to
be happy, and praised, and loved, and to see happy faces round me. How
could I help it? The birds there who are singing in the darling, beloved
court--they do what they like, and Thou art not angry with them for
being happy! And Thou wilt not be more cruel to me than to them, great
God--for what did I know more than they? Thou hast made the beautiful
sunshine, and the pleasant, pleasant world, and the flowers, and the
birds--Thou wilt not send me to burn for ever and ever? Will not a
hundred years be punishment enough-or a thousand? Oh God! is not this
punishment enough already,--to have to leave him, just as just as I
am beginning to long to be good, and to be worthy of him?.... Oh, have
mercy--mercy--mercy--and let me go after I have been punished enough!
Why may I not turn into a bird, or even a worm, and come back again out
of that horrible place, to see the sun shine, and the flowers grow
once more? Oh, am I not punishing myself already? Will not this help to
atone?.... Yes--I will die!--and perhaps so God may pity me!’

And with trembling hands she drew the sword from its sheath and covered
the blade with kisses.

‘Yes--on this sword--with which he won his battles. That is right--his
to the last! How keen and cold it looks! Will it be very painful?....
No--I will not try the point, or my heart might fail me. I will fall on
it at once: let it hurt me as it may, it will be too late to draw back
then. And after all it is his sword--It will not have the heart to
torture me much. And yet he struck me himself this morning!’

And at that thought, a long wild cry of misery broke from her lips, and
rang through the house. Hurriedly she fastened the sword upright to the
foot of the bed, and tore open her tunic.... ‘Here--under this widowed
bosom, where his head will never lie again! There are footsteps in the
passage! Quick, Pelagia! Now--’

And she threw up her arms wildly, in act to fall....

‘It is his step! And he will find me, and never know that it is for him
I die!’

The Amal tried the door. It was fast. With a single blow he burst it
open, and demanded--

‘What was that shriek? What is the meaning of this? Pelagia!’

Pelagia, like a child caught playing with a forbidden toy, hid her face
in her hands and cowered down.

‘What is it?’ cried he, lifting her.

But she burst from his arms.

‘No, no!--never more! I am not worthy of you! Let me die, wretch that
I am! I can only drag you down. You must be a king. You must marry
her--the wise woman!’

‘Hypatia! She is dead!’

‘Dead?’ shrieked Pelagia.

‘Murdered, an hour ago, by those Christian devils.’

Pelagia put her hands over her eyes, and burst into tears. Were they of
pity or of joy?... She did not ask herself; and we will not ask her.

‘Where is my sword? Soul of Odin! Why is it fastened here?’

‘I was going to--Do not be angry!.... They told me that I had better
die, and--

The Amal stood thunderstruck for a moment.

‘Oh, do not strike me again! Send me to the mill. Kill me now with your
own hand! Anything but another blow!’

‘A blow?--Noble woman!’ cried the Amal, clasping her in his arms.

The storm was past; and Pelagia had been nestling to that beloved heart,
cooing like a happy dove, for many a minute before the Amal aroused
himself and her....

‘Now!--quick! We have not a moment to lose. Up to the tower, where you
will be safe; and then to show these curs what comes of snarling round
the wild wolves’ den!’



CHAPTER XXIX: NEMESIS


And was the Amal’s news true, then?

Philammon saw Raphael rush across the street into the Museum gardens.
His last words had been a command to stay where he was; and the boy
obeyed him. The black porter who let Raphael out told him somewhat
insolently, that his mistress would see no one, and receive no messages:
but he had made up his mind: complained of the sun, quietly ensconced
himself behind a buttress, and sat coiled up on the pavement, ready for
a desperate spring. The slave stared at him: but he was accustomed to
the vagaries of philosophers; and thanking the gods that he was not born
in that station of life, retired to his porter’s cell, and forgot the
whole matter.

There Philammon awaited a full half-hour. It seemed to him hours, days,
years. And yet Raphael did not return: and yet no guards appeared. Was
the strange Jew a traitor? Impossible!--his face had shown a desperate
earnestness of terror as intense as Philammon’s own.... Yet why did he
not return?

Perhaps he had found out that the streets were clear; their mutual fears
groundless.... What meant that black knot of men some two hundred yards
off, hanging about the mouth of the side street, just opposite the
door which led to her lecture-room? He moved to watch them: they had
vanished. He lay down again and waited.... There they were again. It was
a suspicious post. That street ran along the back of the Caesareum, a
favourite haunt of monks, communicating by innumerable entries and back
buildings with the great Church itself.... And yet, why should there
not be a knot of monks there? What more common in every street of
Alexandria? He tried to laugh away his own fears. And yet they ripened,
by the very intensity of thinking on them, into certainty. He knew that
something terrible was at hand. More than once he looked out from his
hiding-place--the knot of men were still there;.... it seemed to have
increased, to draw nearer. If they found him, what would they not
suspect? What did he care? He would die for her, if it came to that--not
that it could come to that: but still he must speak to her--he must warn
her. Passenger after passenger, carriage after carriage passed along the
street: student after student entered the lecture-room; but he never saw
them, not though they passed him close. The sun rose higher and higher,
and turned his whole blaze upon the corner where Philammon crouched,
till the pavement scorched like hot iron, and his eyes were dazzled by
the blinding glare: but he never heeded it. His whole heart, and sense,
and sight, were riveted upon that well-known door, expecting it to
open....

At last a curricle, glittering with silver, rattled round the corner
and stopped opposite him. She must becoming now. The crowd had vanished.
Perhaps it was, after all, a fancy of his own. No; there they were,
peeping round the corner, close to the lecture-room--the hell-hounds! A
slave brought out an embroidered cushion--and then Hypatia herself
came forth, looking more glorious than ever; her lips set in a sad firm
smile; her eyes uplifted, inquiring, eager, and yet gentle, dimmed by
some great inward awe, as if her soul was far away aloft, and face to
face with God.

In a moment he sprang up to her, caught her robe convulsively, threw
himself on his knees before her--

‘Stop! Stay! You are going to destruction!’

Calmly she looked down upon him.

‘Accomplice of witches! Would you make of Theon’s daughter a traitor
like yourself?’

He sprang up, stepped back, and stood stupefied with shame and
despair....

She believed him guilty, then!.... It was the will of God!

The plumes of the horses were waving far down the street before he
recovered himself, and rushed after her, shouting he knew not what.

It was too late! A dark wave of men rushed from the ambuscade, surged
up round the car.... swept forward.... she had disappeared! and as
Philammon followed breathless, the horses galloped past him madly
homeward with the empty carriage.

Whither were they dragging her? To the Caesareum, the Church of God
Himself? Impossible! Why thither of all places of the earth? Why did the
mob, increasing momentarily by hundreds, pour down upon the beach, and
return brandishing flints, shells, fragments of pottery?

She was upon the church steps before he caught them up, invisible among
the crowd; but he could track her by the fragments of her dress.

Where were her gay pupils now? Alas! they had barricaded themselves
shamefully in the Museum, at the first rush which swept her from the
door of the lecture-room. Cowards! he would save her!

And he struggled in vain to pierce the dense mass of Parabolani and
monks, who, mingled with the fishwives and dock-workers, leaped and
yelled around their victim. But what he could not do another and a
weaker did--even the little porter. Furiously--no one knew how or
whence--he burst up as if from the ground in the thickest of the crowd,
with knife, teeth, and nails, like a venomous wild-cat, tearing his way
towards his idol. Alas! he was torn down himself, rolled over the steps,
and lay there half dead in an agony of weeping, as Philammon sprang up
past him into the church.

Yes. On into the church itself! Into the cool dim shadow, with its
fretted pillars, and lowering domes, and candles, and incense, and
blazing altar, and great pictures looking from the walls athwart the
gorgeous gloom. And right in front, above the altar, the colossal Christ
watching unmoved from off the wall, His right hand raised to give a
blessing--or a curse?

On, up the nave, fresh shreds of her dress strewing the holy
pavement--up the chancel steps themselves--up to the altar--right
underneath the great still Christ: and there even those hell-hounds
paused.

She shook herself free from her tormentors, and springing back, rose for
one moment to her full height, naked, snow-white against the dusky mass
around--shame and indignation in those wide clear eyes, but not a stain
of fear. With one hand she clasped her golden locks around her; the
other long white arm was stretched upward toward the great still Christ
appealing--and who dare say in vain?--from man to God. Her lips were
opened to speak: but the words that should have come from them reached
God’s ear alone; for in an instant Peter struck her down, the dark
mass closed over her again.... and then wail on wail, long, wild,
ear-piercing, rang along the vaulted roofs, and thrilled like the
trumpet of avenging angels through Philammon’s ears.

Crushed against a pillar, unable to move in the dense mass, he pressed
his hands over his ears. He could not shut out those shrieks! When would
they end? What in the name of the God of mercy were they doing? Tearing
her piecemeal? Yes, and worse than that. And still the shrieks rang
on, and still the great Christ looked down on Philammon with that calm,
intolerable eye, and would not turn away. And over His head was written
in the rainbow, ‘I am the same, yesterday, to-day, and for ever!’ The
same as He was in Judea of old, Philammon? Then what are these, and in
whose temple? And he covered his face with his hands, and longed to die.

It was over. The shrieks had died away into moans; the moans to silence.
How long had he been there? An hour, or an eternity? Thank God it was
over! For her sake--but for theirs? But they thought not of that as a
new cry rose through the dome.

‘To the Cinaron! Burn the bones to ashes! Scatter them into the sea!’
And the mob poured past him again....

He turned to flee: but, once outside the church, he sank exhausted, and
lay upon the steps, watching with stupid horror the glaring of the
fire, and the mob who leaped and yelled like demons round their Moloch
sacrifice.

A hand grasped his arm; he looked up; it was the porter.

‘And this, young butcher, is the Catholic and apostolic Church?’

‘No! Eudaimon, it is the church of the devils of hell!’ And gathering
himself up, he sat upon the steps and buried his head within his hands.
He would have given life itself for the power of weeping: but his eyes
and brain were hot and dry as the desert.

Eudaimon looked at him a while. The shock had sobered the poor fop for
once.

‘I did what I could to die with her!’ said he.

‘I did what I could to save her!’ answered Philammon.

‘I know it. Forgive the words which I just spoke. Did we not both love
her?’

And the little wretch sat down by Philammon’s side, and as the blood
dripped from his wounds upon the pavement, broke out into a bitter agony
of human tears.

There are times when the very intensity of our misery is a boon, and
kindly stuns us till we are unable to torture ourselves by thought. And
so it was with Philammon then. He sat there, he knew not how long.

‘She is with the gods,’ said Eudaimon at last.

‘She is with the God of gods,’ answered Philammon: and they both were
silent again.

Suddenly a commanding voice aroused them.

They looked up, and saw before them Raphael Aben-Ezra.

He was pale as death, but calm as death. One look into his face told
them that he knew all.

‘Young monk,’ he said, between his closed teeth, ‘you seem to have loved
her?’

Philammon looked up, but could not speak.

‘Then arise, and flee for your life into the farthest corner of the
desert, ere the doom of Sodom and Gomorrha fall upon this accursed city.
Have you father, mother, brother, sister,--ay, cat, dog, or bird for
which you care, within its walls?’

Philammon started; for he recollected Pelagia.... That evening, so Cyril
had promised, twenty trusty monks were to have gone with him to seize
her.

‘You have? Then take them with you, and escape, and remember Lot’s wife.
Eudaimon, come with me. You must lead me to your house, to the lodging
of Miriam the Jewess. Do not deny! I know that she is there. For the
sake of her who is gone I will hold you harmless, ay, reward you richly,
if you prove faithful. Rise!’

Eudaimon, who knew Raphael’s face well, rose and led the way trembling;
and Philammon was left alone.

They never met again. But Philammon knew that he had been in the
presence of a stronger man than himself, and of one who hated even more
bitterly than he himself that deed at which the very sun, it seemed,
ought to have veiled his face. And his words, ‘Arise, and flee for thy
life,’ uttered as they were with the stern self-command and writhing lip
of compressed agony, rang through his ears like the trump of doom. Yes,
he would flee. He had gone forth to see the world, and he had seen it.
Arsenius was in the right after all. Home to the desert! But first he
would go himself, alone, to Pelagia, and implore her once more to flee
with him. Beast, fool, that he had been to try to win her by force--by
the help of such as these! God’s kingdom was not a kingdom of fanatics
yelling for a doctrine, but of willing, loving, obedient hearts. If he
could not win her heart, her will, he would go alone, and die praying
for her.

He sprang from the steps of the Caesareum, and turned up the street of
the Museum. Alas! it was one roaring sea of heads! They were sacking
Theon’s house--the house of so many memories! Perhaps the poor old man
too had perished! Still--his sister! He must save her and flee. And he
turned up a side street and tried to make his way onward.

Alas again! the whole of the dock-quarter was up and out. Every street
poured its tide of furious fanatics into the main river; and ere he
could reach Pelagia’s house the sun was set, and close behind him,
echoed by ten thousand voices, was the cry of ‘Down with all heathens!
Root out all Arian Goths! Down with idolatrous wantons! Down with
Pelagia Aphrodite!’

He hurried down the alley, to the tower door, where Wulf had promised
to meet him. It was half open, and in the dusk he could see a figure
standing in the doorway. He sprang up the steps, and found, not Wulf,
but Miriam.

‘Let me pass!’

‘Wherefore?’

He made no answer, and tried to push past her.

‘Fool, fool, fool!’ whispered the hag, holding the door against him with
all her strength. ‘Where are your fellow-kidnappers? Where are your band
of monks?’

Philammon started back. How had she discovered his plan?

‘Ay--where are they? Besotted boy! Have you not seen enough of monkery
this afternoon, that you must try still to make that poor girl even such
a one as yourselves? Ay, you may root out your own human natures if you
will, and make yourselves devils in trying to become angels: but woman
she is, and woman she shall live or die!’

‘Let me pass!’ cried Philammon furiously.

‘Raise your voice--and I raise mine: and then your life is not worth a
moment’s purchase. Fool, do you think I speak as a Jewess? I speak as
a woman--as a nun! I was a nun once, madman--the iron entered into my
soul!--God do so to me, and more also, if it ever enter into another
soul while I can prevent it! You shall not have her! I will strangle her
with my own hand first!’ And turning from him, she darted up the winding
stair.

He followed: but the intense passion of the old hag hurled her onward
with the strength and speed of a young Maenad. Once Philammon was
near passing her. But he recollected that he did not know his way, and
contented himself with keeping close behind, and making the fugitive his
guide.

Stair after stair, he fled upward, till she turned suddenly into a
chamber door. Philammon paused. A few feet above him the open sky showed
at the stair-head. They were close then to the roof! One moment more,
and the hag darted out of the room again, and turned to flee upward
still. Philammon caught her by the arm, hurled her back into the empty
chamber, shut the door upon her; and with a few bounds gained the roof,
and met Pelagia face to face.

‘Come!’ gasped he breathlessly. ‘Now is the moment! Come, while they are
all below!’ and he seized her hand.

But Pelagia only recoiled.

‘No, no,’ whispered she in answer, ‘I cannot, cannot--he has forgiven me
all, all! and I am his for ever! And now, just as he is in danger, when
he may be wounded--ah, heaven! would you have me do anything so base as
to desert him?’

‘Pelagia, Pelagia, darling sister!’ cried Philammon, in an agonised
voice, ‘think of the doom of sin! Think of the pains of hell!’

‘I have thought of them this day: and I do not believe you! No--I do
not! God is not so cruel as you say! And if He were:--to lose my love,
that is hell! Let me burn hereafter, if I do but keep him now!’

Philammon stood stupefied and shuddering. All his own early doubts
flashed across him like a thunderbolt, when in the temple-cave he had
seen those painted ladies at their revels, and shuddered, and asked
himself, were they burning for ever and ever?

‘Come!’ gasped he once again; and throwing himself on his knees before
her, covered her hands with kisses, wildly entreating: but in vain.

‘What is this?’ thundered a voice; not Miriam’s, but the Amal’s. He was
unarmed but he rushed straight upon Philammon.

‘Do not harm him!’ shrieked Pelagia; ‘he is my brother--my brother of
whom I told you!’

‘What does he here?’ cried the Amal, who instantly divined the truth.

Pelagia was silent.

‘I wish to deliver my sister, a Christian, from the sinful embraces of
an Arian heretic; and deliver her I will, or die!’

‘An Arian?’ laughed the Amal. ‘Say a heathen at once, and tell the
truth, young fool! Will you go with him, Pelagia, and turn nun in the
sand-heaps?’

Pelagia sprang towards her lover: Philammon caught her by the arm for
one last despairing appeal: and in a moment, neither knew how, the Goth
and the Greek were locked in deadly struggle, while Pelagia stood in
silent horror, knowing that a call for help would bring instant death to
her brother.

It was over in a few seconds. The Goth lifted Philammon like a baby in
his arms, and bearing him to the parapet, attempted to hurl him into the
canal below. But the active Greek had wound himself like a snake around
him, and held him by the throat with the strength of despair. Twice they
rolled and tottered on the parapet; and twice recoiled. A third fearful
lunge--the earthen wall gave way; and down to the dark depths, locked in
each other’s arms, fell Goth and Greek.

Pelagia rushed to the brink, and gazed downward into the gloom, dumb and
dry-eyed with horror. Twice they turned over together in mid-air.... The
foot of the tower, as was usual in Egypt, sloped outwards towards the
water. They must strike upon that--and then! ....It seemed an eternity
ere they touched the masonry.... The Amal was undermost.... She saw his
fair floating locks dash against the cruel stone. His grasp suddenly
loosened, his limbs collapsed; two distinct plunges broke the dark
sullen water; and then all was still but the awakened ripple, lapping
angrily against the wall.

Pelagia gazed down one moment more, and then, with a shriek which rang
along roof and river, she turned, and fled down the stairs and out into
the night.

Five minutes afterwards, Philammon, dripping, bruised, and bleeding, was
crawling up the water-steps at the lower end of the lane. A woman rushed
from the postern door, and stood on the quay edge, gazing with clasped
hands into the canal. The moon fell full on her face. It was Pelagia.
She saw him, knew him, and recoiled.

‘Sister!--my sister! Forgive me!’

‘Murderer!’ she shrieked, and dashing aside his outspread hands, fled
wildly up the passage.

The way was blocked with bales of merchandise: but the dancer bounded
over them like a deer; while Philammon, half stunned by his fall, and
blinded by his dripping locks, stumbled, fell, and lay, unable to rise.
She held on for a few yards towards the torch-lit mob, which was surging
and roaring in the main street above, then turned suddenly into a side
alley, and vanished; while Philammon lay groaning upon the pavement,
without a purpose or a hope upon earth.

Five minutes more, and Wulf was gazing over the broken parapet, at the
head of twenty terrified spectators, male and female, whom Pelagia’s
shriek had summoned.

He alone suspected that Philammon had been there; and shuddering at the
thought of what might have happened, he kept his secret.

But all knew that Pelagia had been on the tower; all had seen the Amal
go up thither. Where were they now? And why was the little postern gate
found open, and shut only just in time to prevent the entrance of the
mob?

Wulf stood, revolving in a brain but too well practised in such cases,
all possible contingencies of death and horror. At last--

‘A rope and a light, Smid!’ he almost whispered.

They were brought, and Wulf, resisting all the entreaties of the younger
men to allow them to go on the perilous search, lowered himself through
the breach.

He was about two-thirds down, when he shook the rope, and called in a
stifled voice, to those above--

‘Haul up. I have seen enough.’

Breathless with curiosity and fear, they hauled him up. He stood among
them for a few moments, silent, as if stunned by the weight of some
enormous woe.

‘Is he dead?’

‘Odin has taken his son home, wolves of the Goths!’ And he held out
his right hand to the awe-struck ring, and burst into an agony of
weeping.... A clotted tress of long fair hair lay in his palm.

It was snatched; handed from man to man.... One after another recognised
the beloved golden locks. And then, to the utter astonishment of the
girls who stood round, the great simple hearts, too brave to be ashamed
of tears, broke out and wailed like children .... Their Amal! Their
heavenly man! Odin’s own son, their joy and pride, and glory! Their
‘Kingdom of heaven,’ as his name declared him, who was all that each
wished to be, and more, and yet belonged to them, bone of their bone,
flesh of their flesh! Ah, it is bitter to all true human hearts to be
robbed of their ideal, even though that ideal be that of a mere wild
bull, and soulless gladiator....

At last Smid spoke--

‘Heroes, this is Odin’s doom; and the All-father is just. Had we
listened to Prince Wulf four months ago, this had never been. We have
been cowards and sluggards, and Odin is angry with his children. Let us
swear to be Prince Wulf’s men and follow him to-morrow where he will!’

Wulf grasped his outstretched hand lovingly-- ‘No, Smid, son of Troll!
These words are not yours to speak. Agilmund son of Cniva, Goderic son
of Ermenric, you are Balts, and to you the succession appertains. Draw
lots here, which of you shall be our chieftain.’

‘No! no! Wulf!’ cried both the youths at once. ‘You are the hero! you
are the Sagaman! We are not worthy; we have been cowards and sluggards,
like the rest. Wolves of the Goths, follow the Wolf, even though he lead
you to the land of the giants!’

A roar of applause followed.

‘Lift him on the shield,’ cried Goderic, tearing off his buckler. ‘Lift
him on the shield! Hail, Wulf king! Wulf, king of Egypt!’

And the rest of the Goths, attracted by the noise, rushed up the
tower-stairs in time to join in the mighty shout of ‘Wulf, king of
Egypt!’--as careless of the vast multitude which yelled and surged
without, as boys are of the snow against the window-pane.

‘No!’ said Wulf solemnly, as he stood on the uplifted shield. ‘If I be
indeed your king, and ye my men, wolves of the Goths, to-morrow we will
go forth of this place, hated of Odin, rank with the innocent blood of
the Alruna maid. Back to Adolf; back to our own people! Will you go?’

‘Back to Adolf!’ shouted the men.

‘You will not leave us to be murdered?’ cried one of the girls. ‘The mob
are breaking the gates already!’

‘Silence, silly one! Men--we have one thing to do. The Amal must not go
to the Valhalla without fair attendance.’

‘Not the poor girls?’ said Agilmund, who took for granted that Wulf
would wish to celebrate the Amal’s funeral in true Gothic fashion by a
slaughter of slaves.

‘No.... One of them I saw behave this very afternoon worthy of a Vala.
And they, too--they may make heroes’ wives after all, yet .... Women are
better than I fancied, even the worst of them. No. Go down, heroes, and
throw the gates open; and call in the Greek hounds to the funeral supper
of a son of Odin.’

‘Throw the gates open?’

‘Yes. Goderic, take a dozen men, and be ready in the east hall.
Agilmund, go with a dozen to the west side of the court--there in the
kitchen; and wait till you hear my war-cry. Smid and the rest of you,
come with me through the stables close to the gate--as silent as Hela.’

And they went down--to meet, full on the stairs below, old Miriam.

Breathless and exhausted by her exertion, she had fallen heavily before
Philammon’s strong arm; and lying half stunned for a while, recovered
just in time to meet her doom.

She knew that it was come, and faced it like herself.

‘Take the witch!’ said Wulf slowly--‘Take the corrupter of heroes--the
cause of all our sorrows!’

Miriam looked at him with a quiet smile.

‘The witch is accustomed long ago to hear fools lay on her the
consequences of their own lust and laziness.’

‘Hew her down, Smid, son of Troll, that she may pass the Amal’s soul and
gladden it on her way to Niflheim.’

Smid did it: but so terrible were the eyes which glared upon him from
those sunken sockets, that his sight was dazzled. The axe turned aside,
and struck her shoulder. She reeled, but did not fall.

‘It is enough,’ she said quietly.

‘The accursed Grendel’s daughter numbed my arm!’ said Smid. ‘Let her go!
No man shall say that I struck a woman twice.’

‘Nidhogg waits for her, soon or late,’ answered Wulf.

And Miriam, coolly folding her shawl around her, turned and walked
steadily down the stair; while all men breathed more freely, as if
delivered from some accursed and supernatural spell.

‘And now,’ said Wulf, ‘to your posts, and vengeance!’

The mob had weltered and howled ineffectually around the house for some
half-hour. But the lofty walls, opening on the street only by a few
narrow windows in the higher stories, rendered it an impregnable
fortress. Suddenly, the iron gates were drawn back, disclosing to
the front rank the court, glaring empty and silent and ghastly in the
moonlight. For an instant they recoiled, with a vague horror, and dread
of treachery: but the mass behind pressed them onward, and in swept
the murderers of Hypatia, till the court was full of choking wretches,
surging against the walls and pillars in aimless fury. And then, from
under the archway on each side, rushed a body of tall armed men, driving
back all incomers more; the gates slid together again upon their grooves
and the wild beasts of Alexandria were trapped at last.

And then began a murder grim and great. From three different doors
issued a line of Goths, whose helmets and mail-shirts made them
invulnerable to the clumsy weapons of the mob, and began hewing their
way right through the living mass, helpless from their close-packed
array. True, they were but as one to ten; but what are ten curs before
one lion?.... And the moon rose higher and higher, staring down ghastly
and unmoved upon that doomed court of the furies, and still the bills
and swords hewed on and on, and the Goths drew the corpses, as they
found room, towards a dark pile in the midst, where old Wulf sat upon
a heap of slain, singing the praises of the Amal and the glories of
Valhalla, while the shrieks of his lute rose shrill above the shrieks of
the flying and the wounded, and its wild waltz-time danced and rollicked
on swifter and swifter as the old singer maddened, in awful mockery of
the terror and agony around.

And so, by men and purposes which recked not of her, as is the wont of
Providence, was the blood of Hypatia avenged in part that night. In part
only. For Peter the Reader, and his especial associates, were safe in
sanctuary at the Caesareum, clinging to the altar. Terrified at the
storm which they had raised, and fearing the consequences of an attack
upon the palace, they had left the mob to run riot at its will; and
escaped the swords of the Goths to be reserved for the more awful
punishment of impunity.



CHAPTER XXX: EVERY MAN TO HIS OWN PLACE


It was near midnight. Raphael had been sitting some three hours in
Miriam’s inner chamber, waiting in vain for her return. To recover, if
possible, his ancestral wealth; to convey it, without a day’s delay, to
Cyrene; and, if possible, to persuade the poor old Jewess to accompany
him, and there to soothe, to guide, perhaps to convert her, was his next
purpose:--at all events, with or without his wealth, to flee from that
accursed city. And he counted impatiently the slow hours and minutes
which detained him in an atmosphere which seemed reeking with innocent
blood, black with the lowering curse of an avenging God. More than once,
unable to bear the thought, he rose to depart, and leave his wealth
behind: but he was checked again by the thought of his own past
life. How had he added his own sin to the great heap of Alexandrian
wickedness! How had he tempted others, pampered others in evil! Good
God! how had he not only done evil with all his might, but had pleasure
in those who did the same! And now, now he was reaping the fruit of his
own devices. For years past, merely to please his lust of power, his
misanthropic scorn, he had been malting that wicked Orestes wickeder
than he was even by his own base will and nature; and his puppet had
avenged itself upon him! He, he had prompted him to ask Hypatia’s
hand.... He had laid, half in sport, half in envy of her excellence,
that foul plot against the only human being whom he loved.... and he had
destroyed her! He, and not Peter, was the murderer of Hypatia! True,
he had never meant her death.... No; but had he not meant for her worse
than death? He had never foreseen.... No; but only because he did not
choose to foresee. He had chosen to be a god; to kill and to make alive
by his own will and law; and behold, he had become a devil by that very
act. Who can--and who dare, even if he could--withdraw the sacred veil
from those bitter agonies of inward shame and self-reproach, made all
the more intense by his clear and undoubting knowledge that he was
forgiven? What dread of punishment, what blank despair, could have
pierced that great heart so deeply as did the thought that the God whom
he had hated and defied had returned him good for evil, and rewarded him
not according to his iniquities? That discovery, as Ezekiel of old had
warned his forefathers, filled up the cup of his self-loathing.... To
have found at last the hated and dreaded name of God: and found that
it was Love!.... To possess Victoria, a living, human likeness, however
imperfect, of that God; and to possess in her a home, a duty, a purpose,
a fresh clear life of righteous labour, perhaps of final victory....
That was his punishment; that was the brand of Cain upon his forehead;
and he felt it greater than he could bear.

But at least there was one thing to be done. Where he had sinned, there
he must make amends; not as a propitiation, not even as a restitution;
but simply as a confession of the truth which he had found. And as his
purpose shaped itself, he longed and prayed that Miriam might return,
and make it possible.

And Miriam did return. He heard her pass slowly through the outer room,
learn from the girls who was within, order them out of the apartments,
close the outer door upon them; at last she entered, and said quietly--

‘Welcome! I have expected you. You could not surprise old Miriam. The
teraph told me last night that you would be here....’

Did she see the smile of incredulity upon Raphael’s face, or was it some
sudden pang of conscience which made her cry out--

‘.... No! I did not! I never expected you! I am a liar, a miserable old
liar, who cannot speak the truth, even if I try! Only look kind! Smile
at me, Raphael!--Raphael come back at last to his poor, miserable,
villainous old mother! Smile on me but once, my beautiful, my son! my
son!’

And springing to him, she clasped him in her arms.

‘Your son?’

‘Yes, my son! Safe at last! Mine at last! I can prove it now! The son of
my womb, though not the son of my vows!’ And she laughed hysterically.
‘My child, my heir, for whom I have toiled and hoarded for
three-and-thirty years! Quick! here are my keys. In that cabinet are all
my papers--all I have is yours. Your jewels are safe--buried with mine.
The negro-woman, Eudaimon’s wife, knows where. I made her swear secrecy
upon her little wooden idol, and, Christian as she is, she has been
honest. Make her rich for life. She hid your poor old mother, and
kept her safe to see her boy come home. But give nothing to her little
husband: he is a bad fellow, and beats her.--Go, quick! take your
riches, and away!.... No; stay one moment just one little moment--that
the poor old wretch may feast her eyes with the sight of her darling
once more before she dies!’

‘Before you die? Your son? God of my fathers, what is the meaning of
all this, Miriam? This morning I was the son of Ezra the merchant of
Antioch!’

‘His son and heir, his son and heir! He knew all at last. We told him on
his death-bed! I swear that we told him, and he adopted you!’

‘We! Who?’

‘His wife and I. He craved for a child, the old miser, and we gave
him one--a better one than ever came of his family. But he loved you,
accepted you, though he did know all. He was afraid of being laughed at
after he was dead--afraid of having it known that he was childless, the
old dotard! No--he was right--true Jew in that, after all!’

‘Who was my father, then?’ interrupted Raphael, in utter bewilderment.

The old woman laughed a laugh so long and wild, that Raphael shuddered.

‘Sit down at your mother’s feet. Sit down.... just to please the poor
old thing! Even if you do not believe her, just play at being her child,
her darling, for a minute before she dies; and she will tell you all....
perhaps there is time yet!’

And he sat down.... ‘What if this incarnation of all wickedness were
really my mother?.... And yet--why should I shrink thus proudly from the
notion? Am I so pure myself as to deserve a purer source?’.... And
the old woman laid her hand fondly on his head, and her skinny fingers
played with his soft locks, as she spoke hurriedly and thick.

‘Of the house of Jesse, of the seed of Solomon; not a rabbi from Babylon
to Rome dare deny that! A king’s daughter I am, and a king’s heart I
had, and have, like Solomon’s own, my son!.... A kingly heart.... It
made me dread and scorn to be a slave, a plaything, a soul-less doll,
such as Jewish women are condemned to be by their tyrants, the men. I
craved for wisdom, renown, power--power--power! and my nation refused
them to me; because, forsooth, I was a woman! So I left them. I went
to the Christian priests.... They gave me what I asked.... They gave
me more.... They pampered my woman’s vanity, my pride, my self-will, my
scorn of wedded bondage, and bade me be a saint, the judge of angels and
archangels, the bride of God! Liars! liars! And so--if you laugh, you
kill me, Raphael--and so Miriam, the daughter of Jonathan--Miriam, of
the house of David--Miriam, the descendant of Ruth and Rachab, of Rachel
and Sara, became a Christian nun, and shut herself up to see visions,
and dream dreams, and fattened her own mad self-conceit upon the impious
fancy that she was the spouse of the Nazarene, Joshua Bar-Joseph, whom
she called Jehovah Ishi--Silence! If you stop me a moment, it may be
too late. I hear them calling me already; and I made them promise not to
take me before I had told all to my son--the son of my shame!’

‘Who calls you?’ asked Raphael; but after one strong shudder she ran on,
unheeding--

‘But they lied, lied, lied! I found them out that day.... Do not look
up at me, and I will tell you all. There was a riot--a fight between
the Christian devils and the Heathen devils--and the convent was sacked,
Raphael, my son!--Sacked!.... Then I found out their blasphemy.... Oh
God! I shrieked to Him, Raphael! I called on Him to rend His heavens and
come down--to pour out His thunderbolts upon them--to cleave the earth
and devour them--to save the wretched helpless girl who adored Him,
who had given up father, mother, kinsfolk, wealth, the light of heaven,
womanhood itself, for Him--who worshipped, meditated over Him, dreamed
of Him night and day .... And, Raphael, He did not hear me.... He did
not hear me! .... did not hear the!.... And then I knew it all for a
lie! a lie!’

‘And you knew it for what it is!’ cried Raphael through his sobs, as he
thought of Victoria, and felt every vein burning with righteous wrath.

--‘There was no mistaking that test, was there?.... For nine months I
was mad. And then your voice, my baby, my joy, my pride that brought me
to myself once more! And I shook off the dust of my feet against those
Galilean priests, and went back to my own nation, where God had set me
from the beginning. I made them--the Rabbis, my father, my kin--I made
them all receive me. They could not stand before my eye. I can stake
people do what I will, Raphael! I could--I could make you emperor now,
if I had but time left! I went back. I palmed you off on Ezra as his
son, I and his wife, and made him believe that you had been born to him
while he was in Byzantium .... And then--to live for you! And I did live
for you. For you I travelled from India to Britain, seeking wealth. For
you I toiled, hoarded, lied, intrigued, won money by every means, no
matter how base--for was it not for you? And I have conquered! You are
the richest Jew south of the Mediterranean, you, my son! And you deserve
your wealth. You have your mother’s soul in you, my boy! I watched
you, gloried in you--in your cunning, your daring, your learning, your
contempt for these Gentile hounds. You felt the royal blood of Solomon
within you! You felt that you were a young lion of Judah, and they the
jackals who followed to feed upon your leavings! And now, now! Your only
danger is past! The cunning woman is gone--the sorceress who tried to
take my young lion in her pitfall, and has fallen into the midst of it
herself; and he is safe, and returned to take the nations for a prey,
and grind their bones to powder, as it is written, “He couched like a
lion, he lay down like a lioness’s whelp, and who dare rouse him up?”’

‘Stop!’ said Raphael, ‘I must speak! Mother! I must! As you love me, as
you expect me to love you, answer! Had you a hand in her death? Speak!’

‘Did I not tell you that I was no more a Christian? Had I remained
one--who can tell what I might not have done? All I, the Jewess, dare
do was--Fool that I am! I have forgotten all this time the proof--the
proof--’

‘I need no proof, mother. Your words are enough,’ said Raphael, as
he clasped her hand between his own, and pressed it to his burning
forehead. But the old woman hurried on ‘See! See the black agate which
you gave her in your madness!’

‘How did you obtain that?’

‘I stole it--stole it, my son; as thieves steal, and are crucified for
stealing. What was the chance of the cross to a mother yearning for
her child?--to a mother who put round her baby’s neck, three-and-thirty
black years ago, that broken agate, and kept the other half next her own
heart by day and night? See! See how they fit! Look, and believe your
poor old sinful mother! Look, I say!’ and she thrust the talisman into
his hands.

‘Now, let me die! I vowed never to tell this secret but to you: never
to tell it to you, until the night I died. Farewell, my son! Kiss me but
once--once, my child, my joy! Oh, this makes up for all! Makes up even
for that day, the last on which I ever dreamed myself the bride of the
Nazarene!’

Raphael felt that he must speak, now or never. Though it cost him the
loss of all his wealth, and a mother’s curse, he must speak. And not
daring to look up, he said gently--

‘Men have lied to you about Him, mother: but has He ever lied to you
about Himself? He did not lie to me when He sent me out into the world
to find a man, and sent me back again to you with the good news that The
Man is born into the world.’

But to his astonishment, instead of the burst of bigoted indignation
which he had expected, Miriam answered in a low, confused, abstracted
voice--

‘And did He send you hither? Well--that was more like what I used to
fancy Him....A grand thought it is after all--a Jew the king of heaven
and earth!.... Well--I shall know soon.... I loved Him once,.... and
perhaps....perhaps....’

Why did her head drop heavily upon his shoulder? He turned--a dark
stream of blood was flowing from her lips! He sprang to his feet. The
girls rushed in. They tore open her shawl, and saw the ghastly wound,
which she had hidden with such iron resolution to the last. But it was
too late. Miriam the daughter of Solomon was gone to her own place.
...............

Early the next morning, Raphael was standing in Cyril’s anteroom,
awaiting an audience. There were loud voices within; and after a while a
tribune--whom he knew well hurried out, muttering curses--

‘What brings you here, friend?’ said Raphael.

‘The scoundrel will not give them up,’ answered he, in an undertone.

‘Give up whom?’

‘The murderers. They are in sanctuary now at the Caesareum. Orestes sent
me to demand them: and this fellow defies him openly!’ And the tribune
hurried out.

Raphael, sickened with disgust, half-turned to follow him: but his
better angel conquered, and he obeyed the summons of the deacon who
ushered him in.

Cyril was walking up and down, according to his custom, with great
strides. When he saw who was his visitor, he stopped short with a look
of fierce inquiry. Raphael entered on business at once, with a cold calm
voice.

‘You know me, doubtless; and you know what I was. I am now a Christian
catechumen. I come to make such restitution as I can for certain past
ill-deeds done in this city. You will find among these papers the
trust-deeds for such a yearly sum of money as will enable you to hire
a house of refuge for a hundred fallen women, and give such dowries to
thirty of them yearly as will enable them to find suitable husbands. I
have set down every detail of my plan. On its exact fulfilment depends
the continuance of my gift.’

Cyril took the document eagerly, and was breaking out with some
commonplace about pious benevolence, when the Jew stopped him.

‘Your Holiness’s compliments are unnecessary. It is to your office, not
to yourself, that this business relates.’

Cyril, whose conscience was ill enough at ease that morning, felt
abashed before Raphael’s dry and quiet manner, which bespoke, as he well
knew, reproof more severe than all open upbraidings. So looking down,
not without something like a blush, he ran his eye hastily over the
paper; and then said, in his blandest tone-- ‘My brother will forgive me
for remarking, that while I acknowledge his perfect right to dispose
of his charities as he will, it is somewhat startling to me, as
Metropolitan of Egypt to find not only the Abbot Isidore of Pelusium,
but the secular Defender of the Plebs, a civil officer, implicated, too,
in the late conspiracy, associated with me as co-trustees.’

‘I have taken the advice of more than one Christian bishop on the
matter. I acknowledge your authority by my presence here. If the
Scriptures say rightly, the civil magistrates are as much God’s
ministers as you; and I am therefore bound to acknowledge their
authority also. I should have preferred associating the Prefect with you
in the trust: but as your dissensions with the present occupant of that
post might have crippled my scheme, I have named the Defender of the
Plebs, and have already put into his hands a copy of this document.
Another copy has been sent to Isidore, who is empowered to receive all
moneys from my Jewish bankers in Pelusium.’

‘You doubt, then, either my ability or my honesty?’ said Cyril, who was
becoming somewhat nettled.

‘If your Holiness dislikes my offer, it is easy to omit your name in the
deed. One word more. If you deliver up to justice the murderers of my
friend Hypatia, I double my bequest on the spot.’

Cyril burst out instantly--

‘Thy money perish with thee! Do you presume to bribe me into delivering
up my children to the tyrant?’

‘I offer to give you the means of showing more mercy, provided that you
will first do simple justice.’

‘Justice?’ cried Cyril. ‘Justice? If it be just that Peter should die,
sir, see first whether it was not just that Hypatia should die. Not that
I compassed it. As I live, I would have given my own right hand that
this had not happened! But now that it is done--let those who talk of
justice look first in which scale of the balance it lies! Do you fancy,
sir, that the people do not know their enemies from their friends? Do
you fancy that they are to sit with folded hands, while a pedant makes
common cause with a profligate, to drag them back again into the very
black gulf of outer darkness, ignorance, brutal lust, grinding slavery,
from which the Son of God died to free them, from which they are
painfully and slowly struggling upward to the light of day? You, sir, if
you be a Christian catechumen, should know for yourself what would
have been the fate of Alexandria had the devil’s plot of two days since
succeeded. What if the people struck too fiercely? They struck in the
right place. What if they have given the reins to passions fit only
for heathens? Recollect the centuries of heathendom which bred those
passions in them, and blame not my teaching, but the teaching of their
forefathers. That very Peter.... What if he have for once given place to
the devil, and avenged where he should have forgiven? Has he no memories
which may excuse him for fancying, in a just paroxysm of dread, that
idolatry and falsehood must be crushed at any risk?--He who counts back
for now three hundred years, in persecution after persecution, martyrs,
sir! martyrs--if you know what that word implies--of his own blood and
kin; who, when he was but a seven years’ boy, saw his own father made a
sightless cripple to this day, and his elder sister, a consecrated nun,
devoured alive by swine in the open streets, at the hands of those who
supported the very philosophy, the very gods, which Hypatia attempted
yesterday to restore. God shall judge such a man; not I, nor you!’

‘Let God judge him, then, by delivering him to God’s minister.’

‘God’s minister? That heathen and apostate Prefect? When he has expiated
his apostasy by penance, and returned publicly to the bosom of the
Church, it will be time enough to obey him: till then he is the minister
of none but the devil. And no ecclesiastic shall suffer at the tribunal
of an infidel. Holy Writ forbids us to go to law before the unjust.--Let
the world say of me what it will. I defy it and its rulers. I have to
establish the kingdom of God in this city, and do it I will, knowing
that other foundation can no man lay than that which is laid, which is
Christ.’

‘Wherefore you proceed to lay it afresh. A curious method of proving
that it is laid already.’

‘What do you mean?’ asked Cyril angrily.

‘Simply that God’s kingdom, if it exist at all, must be a sort of
kingdom, considering Who is The King of it, which would have established
itself without your help some time since; probably, indeed, if the
Scriptures of my Jewish forefathers are to be believed, before the
foundation of the world; and that your business was to believe that God
was King of Alexandria, and had put the Roman law there to crucify
all murderers, ecclesiastics included, and that crucified they must be
accordingly, as high as Haman himself.’

‘I will hear no more of this, sir! I am responsible to God alone, and
not to you: let it be enough that by virtue of the authority committed
to me, I shall cut off these men from the Church of God, by solemn
excommunication, for three years to come.’

‘They are not cut off, then, it seems, as yet?’

‘I tell you, sir, that I shall cut them off! Do you come here to doubt
my word?’

‘Not in the least, most august sir. But I should have fancied that,
according to my carnal notions of God’s Kingdom and The Church, they had
cut off themselves most effectually already, from the moment when they
cast away the Spirit of God, and took to themselves the spirit of
murder and cruelty; and that all which your most just and laudable
excommunication could effect, would be to inform the public of that
fact. However, farewell! My money shall be forthcoming in due time; and
that is the most important matter between us at this moment. As for your
client Peter and his fellows, perhaps the most fearful punishment which
can befall them, is to go on as they have begun. I only hope that you
will not follow in the same direction.’

‘I?’ cried Cyril, trembling with rage.

‘Really I wish your Holiness well when I say so. If my notions seem to
you somewhat secular, yours--forgive me--seem to the somewhat atheistic;
and I advise you honestly to take care lest while you are busy trying
to establish God’s kingdom, you forget what it is like, by shutting your
eyes to those of its laws which are established already. I have no doubt
that with your Holiness’s great powers you will succeed in establishing
something. My only dread is, that when it is established, you should
discover to your horror that it is the devil’s kingdom and not God’s.’

And without waiting for an answer, Raphael bowed himself out of the
august presence, and sailing for Berenice that very day, with Eudaimon
and his negro wife, went to his own place; there to labour and to
succour, a sad and stern, and yet a loving and a much-loved man, for
many a year to come.

And now we will leave Alexandria also, and taking a forward leap of some
twenty years, see how all other persons mentioned in this history went,
likewise, each to his own place. ...............

A little more than twenty years after, the wisest and holiest man in the
East was writing of Cyril, just deceased--

‘His death made those who survived him joyful; but it grieved most
probably the dead; and there is cause to fear, lest, finding his
presence too troublesome, they should send him back to us.... May it
come to pass, by your prayers, that he may obtain mercy and forgiveness,
that the immeasurable grace of God may prevail over his wickedness!....’

So wrote Theodoret in days when men had not yet intercalated into Holy
Writ that line of an obscure modern hymn, which proclaims to man the
good news that ‘There is no repentance in the grave.’ Let that be as it
may, Cyril has gone to his own place. What that place is in history is
but too well known. What it is in the sight of Him unto whom all live
for ever, is no concern of ours. May He whose mercy is over all His
works, have mercy upon all, whether orthodox or unorthodox, Papist or
Protestant, who, like Cyril, begin by lying for the cause of truth; and
setting off upon that evil road, arrive surely, with the Scribes and
Pharisees of old, sooner or later at their own place!

True, he and his monks had conquered; but Hypatia did not die unavenged.
In the hour of that unrighteous victory, the Church of Alexandria
received a deadly wound. It had admitted and sanctioned those habits of
doing evil that good may come, of pious intrigue, and at last of open
persecution, which are certain to creep in wheresoever men attempt to
set up a merely religious empire, independent of human relationships and
civil laws; to ‘establish,’ in short, a ‘theocracy,’ and by that very
act confess their secret disbelief that God is ruling already. And the
Egyptian Church grew, year by year, more lawless and inhuman. Freed from
enemies without, and from the union which fear compels, it turned its
ferocity inward, to prey on its own vitals, and to tear itself in pieces
by a voluntary suicide, with mutual anathemas and exclusions, till it
ended as a mere chaos of idolatrous sects, persecuting each other for
metaphysical propositions, which, true or false, were equally heretical
in their mouths, because they used them only as watch-words of division.
Orthodox or unorthodox, they knew not God, for they knew neither
righteousness, nor love, nor peace.... They ‘hated their brethren, and
walked on still in darkness, not knowing whither they were going’....
till Amrou and his Mohammedans appeared; and whether they discovered the
fact or not, they went to their own place....

Though the mills of God grind slowly, yet they grind exceeding small;
Though He stands and waits with patience, with exactness grinds He all--

And so found, in due time, the philosophers as well as the ecclesiastics
of Alexandria.

Twenty years after Hypatia’s death, philosophy was flickering down
to the very socket. Hypatia’s murder was its death-blow. In language
tremendous and unmistakable, philosophers had been informed that mankind
had done with them; that they had been weighed in the balances, and
found wanting; that if they had no better Gospel than that to preach,
they must make way for those who had. And they did make way. We hear
little or nothing of them or their wisdom henceforth, except at Athens,
where Proclus, Marinus, Isidore, and others kept up ‘the golden chain of
the Platonic succession,’ and descended deeper and deeper, one after the
other, into the realms of confusion--confusion of the material with
the spiritual, of the subject with the object, the moral with the
intellectual; self-consistent in one thing only,--namely, in their
exclusive Pharisaism utterly unable to proclaim any good news for man
as man, or even to conceive of the possibility of such, and gradually
looking with more and more complacency on all superstitious which
did not involve that one idea, which alone they stated,--namely,
the Incarnation; craving after signs and wonders, dabbling in magic,
astrology, and barbarian fetichisms; bemoaning the fallen age, and
barking querulously at every form of human thought except their own;
writing pompous biographies, full of bad Greek, worse taste, and still
worse miracles....

--That last drear mood Of envious sloth, and proud decrepitude; No
faith, no art, no king, no priest, no God; While round the freezing
founts of life in snarling ring, Crouch’d on the bareworn sod, Babbling
about the unreturning spring, And whining for dead gods, who cannot
save, The toothless systems shiver to their grave.

The last scene of their tragedy was not without a touch of pathos
.... In the year 629, Justinian finally closed, by imperial edict, the
schools of Athens. They had nothing more to tell the world, but what the
world had yawned over a thousand times before: why should they break
the blessed silence by any more such noises? The philosophers felt so
themselves. They had no mind to be martyrs, for they had nothing for
which to testify. They had no message for mankind, and mankind no
interest for them. All that was left for them was to take care of their
own souls; and fancying that they saw something like Plato’s ideal
republic in the pure monotheism of the Guebres, their philosophic
emperor the Khozroo, and his holy caste of magi, seven of them set
off to Persia, to forget the hateful existence of Christianity in
that realised ideal. Alas for the facts! The purest monotheism, they
discovered, was perfectly compatible with bigotry and ferocity, luxury
and tyranny, serails and bowstrings, incestuous marriages and corpses
exposed to the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air; and in
reasonable fear for their own necks, the last seven Sages of Greece
returned home weary-hearted, into the Christian Empire from which they
had fled, fully contented with the permission, which the Khozroo had
obtained for them from Justinian, to hold their peace, and die among
decent people. So among decent people they died, leaving behind them, as
their last legacy to mankind, Simplicius’s Commentaries on Epictetus’s
_Enchiridion_, an essay on the art of egotism, by obeying which,
whosoever list may become as perfect a Pharisee as ever darkened the
earth of God. Peace be to their ashes!.... They are gone to their own
place................

Wulf, too, had gone to his own place, wheresoever that may be. He died
in Spain, full of years and honours, at the court of Adolf and Placidia,
having resigned his sovereignty into the hands of his lawful chieftain,
and having lived long enough to see Goderic and his younger companions
in arms settled with their Alexandrian brides upon the sunny slopes from
which they had expelled the Vandals and the Suevi, to be the ancestors
of ‘bluest-blooded’ Castilian nobles. Wulf died, as he had lived, a
heathen. Placidia, who loved him well, as she loved all righteous and
noble souls, had succeeded once in persuading him to accept baptism.
Adolf himself acted as one of his sponsors; and the old warrior was
in the act of stepping into the font, when he turned suddenly to the
bishop, and asked where were the souls of his heathen ancestors? ‘In
hell,’ replied the worthy prelate. Wulf drew back from the font, and
threw his bearskin cloak around him.... ‘He would prefer, if Adolf had
no objection, to go to his own people.’ [Footnote: A fact.] And so he
died unbaptized, and went to his own place.

Victoria was still alive and busy: but Augustine’s warning had come
true-she had found trouble in the flesh. The day of the Lord had come,
and Vandal tyrants were now the masters of the fair corn-lands of
Africa. Her father and brother were lying by the side of Raphael
Aben-Ezra, beneath the ruined walls of Hippo, slain, long years before,
in the vain attempt to deliver their country from the invading swarms.
But they had died the death of heroes: and Victoria was content. And it
was whispered, among the down-trodden Catholics, who clung to her as an
angel of mercy, that she, too, had endured strange misery and disgrace;
that her delicate limbs bore the scars of fearful tortures; that a room
in her house, into which none ever entered but herself, contained a
young boy’s grave; and that she passed long nights of prayer upon
the spot, where lay her only child, martyred by the hands of Arian
persecutors. Nay, some of the few who, having dared to face that fearful
storm, had survived its fury, asserted that she herself, amid her own
shame and agony, had cheered the shrinking boy on to his glorious death.
But though she had found trouble in the flesh, her spirit knew none.
Clear-eyed and joyful as when she walked by her father’s side on the
field of Ostia, she went to and fro among the victims of Vandal rapine
and persecution, spending upon the maimed, the sick, the ruined, the
small remnants of her former wealth, and winning, by her purity and her
piety, the reverence and favour even of the barbarian conquerors. She
had her work to do, and she did it, and was content; and, in good time,
she also went to her own place.

Abbot Pambo, as well as Arsenius, had been dead several years; the
abbot’s place was filled, by his own dying command, by a hermit from the
neighbouring deserts, who had made himself famous for many miles round,
by his extraordinary austerities, his ceaseless prayers, his loving
wisdom, and, it was rumoured, by various cures which could only be
attributed to miraculous powers. While still in the prime of his
manhood, he was dragged, against his own entreaties, from a lofty cranny
of the cliffs to reside over the Laura of Scetis, and ordained a deacon
at the advice of Pambo, by the bishop of the diocese, who, three years
afterwards, took on himself to command him to enter the priesthood. The
elder monks considered it an indignity to be ruled by so young a man:
but the monastery throve and grew rapidly under his government. His
sweetness, patience, and humility, and above all, his marvellous
understanding of the doubts and temptations of his own generation, soon
drew around him all whose sensitiveness or waywardness had made them
unmanageable in the neighbouring monasteries. As to David in the
mountains, so to him, every one who was discontented, and every one
who was oppressed, gathered themselves. The neighbouring abbots were
at first inclined to shrink from him, as one who ate and drank with
publicans and sinners: but they held their peace, when they saw
those whom they had driven out as reprobates labouring peacefully and
cheerfully under Philammon. The elder generation of Scetis, too, saw,
with some horror, the new influx of sinners: but their abbot had but
one answer to their remonstrances--‘Those who are whole need not a
physician, but those who are sick.’

Never was the young abbot heard to speak harshly of any human being.
‘When thou halt tried in vain for seven years,’ he used to say, ‘to
convert a sinner, then only wilt thou have a right to suspect him of
being a worse man than thyself.’ That there is a seed of good in all
men, a Divine Word and Spirit striving with all men, a gospel and good
news which would turn the hearts of all men, if abbots and priests could
but preach it aright, was his favourite doctrine, and one which he used
to defend, when, at rare intervals, he allowed himself to discuss
any subject from the writings of his favourite theologian, Clement
of Alexandria. Above all, he stopped, by stern rebuke, any attempt to
revile either heretics or heathens. ‘On the Catholic Church alone,’ he
used to say, ‘lies the blame of all heresy and unbelief: for if she were
but for one day that which she ought to be, the world would be converted
before nightfall.’ To one class of sins, indeed, he was inexorable--all
but ferocious; to the sins, namely, of religious persons. In proportion
to any man’s reputation for orthodoxy and sanctity, Philammon’s judgment
of him was stern and pitiless. More than once events proved him to
have been unjust: when he saw himself to be so, none could confess his
mistake more frankly, or humiliate himself for it more bitterly: but
from his rule he never swerved; and the Pharisees of the Nile dreaded
and avoided him, as much as the publicans and sinners loved and followed
him.

One thing only in his conduct gave some handle for scandal, among the
just persons who needed no repentance. It was well known that in his
most solemn devotions, on those long nights of unceasing prayer and
self-discipline, which won him a reputation for superhuman sanctity,
there mingled always with his prayers the names of two women. And, when
some worthy elder, taking courage from his years, dared to hint kindly
to him that such conduct caused some scandal to the weaker brethren,
‘It is true,’ answered he; ‘tell my brethren that I pray nightly for two
women both of them young; both of them beautiful; both of them beloved
by me more than I love my own soul; and tell them, moreover, that one
of the two was a harlot, and the other a heathen.’ The old monk laid his
hand on his mouth, and retired.

The remainder of his history it seems better to extract from an
unpublished fragment of the _Hagiologia Nilotica_ of Graidiocolosyrtus
Tabenniticus, the greater part of which valuable work was destroyed at
the taking of Alexandria under Amrou, A. D. 640.

‘Now when the said abbot had ruled the monastery of Scetis seven years
with uncommon prudence, resplendent in virtue and in miracles, it befell
that one morning he was late for the Divine office. Whereon a certain
ancient brother, who was also a deacon, being sent to ascertain the
cause of so unwonted a defection, found the holy man extended upon the
floor of his cell, like Balaam in the flesh, though far differing from
him in the spirit, having fallen into a trance, but having his eyes
open. Who, not daring to arouse him, sat by him until the hour of noon,
judging rightly that something from heaven had befallen him. And at that
hour, the saint arising without astonishment, said, “Brother, make ready
for me the divine elements, that I may consecrate them.” And he asking
the reason wherefore, the saint replied, “That I may partake thereof
with all my brethren, ere I depart hence. For know assuredly that,
within the seventh day, I shall migrate to the celestial mansions. For
this night stood by me in a dream, those two women, whom I love, and for
whom I pray; the one clothed in a white, the other in a ruby-coloured
garment, and holding each other by the hand; who said to me, ‘That life
after death is not such a one as you fancy; come, therefore, and behold
with us what it is like.’” Troubled at which words, the deacon went
forth yet on account not only of holy obedience, but also of the
sanctity of the blessed abbot, did not hesitate to prepare according
to his command the divine elements: which the abbot having consecrated,
distributed among his brethren, reserving only a portion of the most
holy bread and wine; and then, having bestowed on them all the kiss of
peace, he took the paten and chalice in his hands, and went forth from
the monastery towards the desert; whom the whole fraternity followed
weeping, as knowing that they should see his face no more. But he,
having arrived at the foot of a certain mountain, stopped, and blessing
them, commanded them that they should follow him no farther, and
dismissed them with these words: “As ye have been loved, so love. As ye
have been judged, so judge. As ye have been forgiven, so forgive.”
 And so ascending, was taken away from their eyes. Now they, returning
astonished, watched three days with prayer and fasting: but at last
the eldest brother, being ashamed, like Elisha before the entreaties of
Elijah’s disciples, sent two of the young men to seek their master.

‘To whom befell a thing noteworthy and full of miracles. For ascending
the same mountain where they had left the abbot, they met with a certain
Moorish people, not averse to the Christianity, who declared that
certain days before a priest had passed by them, bearing a paten and
chalice, and blessing them in silence, proceeded across the desert in
the direction of the cave of the holy Amma.

‘And they inquiring who this Amma might be, the Moors answered that
some twenty years ago there had arrived in those mountains a woman more
beautiful than had ever before been seen in that region, dressed in
rich garments; who, after a short sojourn among their tribe, having
distributed among them the jewels which she wore, had embraced the
eremitic life, and sojourned upon the highest peak of a neighbouring
mountain; till, her garments failing her, she became invisible to
mankind, saving to a few women of the tribe, who went up from time to
time to carry her offerings of fruit and meal, and to ask the blessing
of her prayers. To whom she rarely appeared, veiled down to her feet in
black hair of exceeding length and splendour.

‘Hearing these things, the two brethren doubted for awhile: but at last,
determining to proceed, arrived at sunset upon the summit of the said
mountain.

‘Where, behold a great miracle. For above an open grave, freshly dug in
the sand, a cloud of vultures and obscene birds hovered, whom two lions,
fiercely contending, drove away with their talons, as if from some
sacred deposit therein enshrined. Towards whom the two brethren,
fortifying themselves with the sign of the holy cross, ascended.
Whereupon the lions, as having fulfilled the term of their guardianship,
retired; and left to the brethren a sight which they beheld with
astonishment, and not without tears.

‘For in the open grave lay the body of Philammon the abbot: and by his
side, wrapped in his cloak, the corpse of a woman of exceeding beauty,
such as the Moors had described. Whom embracing straitly, as a brother
a sister, and joining his lips to hers, he had rendered up his soul
to God; not without bestowing on her, as it seemed, the most holy
sacrament; for by the grave-side stood the paten and the chalice emptied
of their divine contents.

‘Having beheld which things awhile in silence, they considered that
the right understanding of such matters pertained to the judgment seat
above, and was unnecessary to be comprehended by men consecrated to God.
Whereon, filling in the grave with all haste, they returned weeping
to the Laura, and declared to them the strange things which they had
beheld, and whereof I the writer, having collected these facts from
sacrosanct and most trustworthy mouths, can only say that wisdom is
justified of all her children.

‘Now, before they returned, one of the brethren searching the cave
wherein the holy woman dwelt, found there neither food, furniture, nor
other matters; saving one bracelet of gold, of large size and strange
workmanship, engraven with foreign characters, which no one could
decipher. The which bracelet, being taken home to the Laura of Scetis,
and there dedicated in the chapel to the memory of the holy Amma, proved
beyond all doubt the sanctity of its former possessor, by the miracles
which its virtue worked; the fame whereof spreading abroad throughout
the whole Thebaid, drew innumerable crowds of suppliants to that holy
relic. But it came to pass, after the Vandalic persecution wherewith
Huneric and Genseric the king devastated Africa, and enriched the
Catholic Church with innumerable martyrs, that certain wandering
barbarians of the Vandalic race, imbued with the Arian pravity, and made
insolent by success, boiled over from the parts of Mauritania into
the Thebaid region. Who plundering and burning all monasteries, and
insulting the consecrated virgins, at last arrived even at the monastery
of Scetis, where they not only, according to their impious custom,
defiled the altar, and carried off the sacred vessels, but also bore
away that most holy relic, the chief glory of the Laura,--namely, the
bracelet of the holy Amma, impiously pretending that it had belonged
to a warrior of their tribe, and thus expounded the writing thereon
engraven--

‘For Amalric Amal’s Son Smid Troll’s Son Made Me.

Wherein whether they spoke truth or not, yet their sacrilege did not
remain unpunished; for attempting to return homeward toward the sea by
way of the Nile, they were set upon while weighed down with wine and
sleep, by the country people, and to a man miserably destroyed. But the
pious folk, restoring the holy gold to its pristine sanctuary, were
not unrewarded: for since that day it grows glorious with ever fresh
miracles--as of blind restored to sight, paralytics to strength,
demoniacs to sanity--to the honour of the orthodox Catholic Church, and
of its ever-blessed saints.’ ...............

So be it. Pelagia and Philammon, like the rest, went to their own place;
to the only place where such in such days could find rest; to the desert
and the hermit’s cell, and then forward into that fairy land of legend
and miracle, wherein all saintly lives were destined to be enveloped for
many a century thenceforth.

And now, readers, farewell. I have shown you New Foes under an old
face--your own likenesses in toga and tunic, instead of coat and bonnet.
One word before we part. The same devil who tempted these old Egyptians
tempts you. The same God who would have saved these old Egyptians if
they had willed, will save you, if you will. Their sins are yours,
their errors yours, their doom yours, their deliverance yours. There is
nothing new under the sun. The thing which has been, it is that which
shall be. Let him that is without sin among you cast the first stone,
whether at Hypatia or Pelagia, Miriam or Raphael, Cyril or Philammon.

THE END










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hypatia, by Charles Kingsley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HYPATIA ***

***** This file should be named 6308-0.txt or 6308-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/0/6308/

Produced by P. J. Riddick

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

